G.C.E. (Advanced Level)

         Biology
       Grade 12
     Resource Book




       Department of Science
 Faculty of Science and Technology
   National Institute of Education
             www.nie. lk
Resource Book - Gr.12                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level)

                                 Biology
                               Grade 12
                             Resource Book




                               Department of Science
                         Faculty of Science and Technology
                           National Institute of Education
                                     www.nie. lk
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology   Resource Book -Gr.12



Biology
Resource Book
Resource Book - Gr.12                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




  Message from the Director General




  Dr. (Mrs.) T. A. R. J. Gunasekara
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                               Resource Book -Gr.12


  Message from the Director

  From 2017, a rationalized curriculum is in effect for the G.C.E (A/L) in the education system
  in Sri Lanka. It means updating the curriculum that was in implementation.
  In this effort, revisions were made in the content, form and curricular materials of the G.C.E
  (A/L) subjects Physics, Chemistry and Biology and in concurrence to that, certain changes in
  the learning teaching methodology, evaluation and assessment were expected. The volume of
  the subject matter in the curriculum was largely reduced and several alterations in the learning
  teaching sequence were also made. A new teachers’ hand book was introduced in place of the
  old curricular material, the teachers’ instruction manual.
  The teachers’ instruction manual contained a line-up of subject matter expected to be learnt
  but the newly introduced teacher’s hand book doesn’t accommodate any subject matter. Yet,
  it provides a guideline for teachers to mould the learning events and for evaluation. Though
  the teacher’s hand book implicitly enunciates the limits of the subject by way of the learning
  outcomes, the teachers’ hand book only is not sufﬁcient to identify holistically the conﬁnes
  of the facts. Thus emerged the need of a resource book which simply describes the subject
  content. This book comes to you as a result of an attempt to fulﬁll that requirement.
  When implementing the previous curricula, the use of internationally recognized standard
  textbooks published in English has been an imperative for Advanced Level Science subjects.
  But, the contradictions of facts related to subject matter and inclusion of material beyond the
  limits of the local curriculum in them, usage of those books was not an easy task for teachers
  and students.
  This book, offers students an opportunity to study the relevant subject content in the mother
  tongue within the limits of the local curriculum. It also provides both students and teachers a
  source of reliable information expected by the curriculum dispensing with seedling information
  from various print media and extra classes.
  This book authored by specialist subject teachers and university lectures is presented to you
  after the approval of the Academic Affairs Board and the Council of the NIE. Thus it can be
  recommended as a material of high standard.




  Mr. R. S. J. P. Uduporuwa
  Director
  Department of Science
Resource Book - Gr.12                                                            G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology



                                                       Guidance

                                        Dr.(Mrs.)T.A.R.J. Gunasekara
                                              Director General
                                        National Institute of Education

                                                     Supervision

                                              Mr. R.S.J.P. Uduporuwa
                                          Director, Department of Science
                                          National Institute of Education



                                            Subject Leadership
                                         Miss. P.T.M.K.C. Tennakoon
                                         Assistant Lecturer, Dept. of Science
                                           National Institute of Education

                                      Internal Resource Contribution

                                         Mrs. H.M. Mapagunarathna
                                                  Senior Lecturer
                                           National Institute of Education

                                        Mrs. D.A.H.U. Sumanasekara
                                                 Assistant Lecturer
                                           National Institute of Education

                                                     P. Atchuthan
                                                 Assistant Lecturer
                                           National Institute of Education


                                                    Editorial Panel

              Prof. B.G.D.N.K.de Silva         -     Senior Professor of Molecular Biology,
                                                     University of Sri Jayawardanepura - (Unit 02,03)
                        Prof. S. Abeysinghe    -     Head of the Department, Department of Botnay
                                                     University of Ruhuna - (Unit 02,03,04)
                  Prof. S. Hettiarachchi       -     Senior Professor , Department of Biological
                                                     Sciences, University of Rajarata - (Unit 02,03,04)
            Prof. R.A.S.P. Senanayake          -     Head of the Department, Department of
                                                     Botany, University of Kelaniya - (Unit 03,04)
          Prof. D.D. Wickramasinghe            -     Head of the Department, Department of
                                                     Zoology, University of Colombo- (Unit 02)
                   Prof. A. Pathirathna        -     Senior Professor, Department of Zoology and
                                                     Environmental Managment
                                                     University of Kelaniya (Unit 05)
                  Dr.P.L. Hettiarachchi         -    Senior Lecturer,Department of Biological
                                                     Sciences, University of Rajarata (Unit 04)
           Dr. W.A.M. Daundesekara             -     Senior Lecturer,Department of Botany,
                                                     University of Peradeniya-(Unit 04)
                 Dr. S. Kumburegama            -     Senior Lecturer, Department of Zoology,
                                                     University of Peradeniya -(Unit 05)
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                       Resource Book -Gr.12



                                       External resource contribution

      Mrs.P.H.N. Kulathilake       -     SLTS-I, Devi Balika Vidyalaya, Colombo 08.
          Mrs. B. Ganeshadas       -     SLTS-I, D.S.Senanayake College, Colombo 08
           Mrs. P.A.K.Perera       -     SLTS-I (Rtd),
       Mrs. H.L. Hemanatha         -     SLTS-I ,Royal College, Colombo 07
     Mrs. M.S.J. Jayasooriya       -     SLTS- Ladies College, Colombo 07
     Mrs. M.R.P.R Basnayake        -     SLTS-I (Rtd) , St.Anne’s College, Kurunegala
           Mr. A. Illaperuma       -     SLTS-I(Rtd)
       Mrs. H.A.S.G. Perera        -     SLTS-I , Sirimawo Bandaranayake College,
                                         Colombo -07
Mrs. A.M.S.D. N. Abeyakoon         -     SLTS-I (Rtd ), St. Anthony’s Girls’ College , Kandy
        Mrs. S.D.P.Bandara         -     SLTS-I Rtd), Dharamaraga College, Kandy
          Mrs. J.A. J.Hanee        -     SLTS-I Zahira College, Gampola
         Mr. W.G. Pathirana -            SLTS-I Rahula College, Matara
           Mrs. C.V.S. Devotta     -     SLTS-I ,Dammissara College, Natthandiya
          Mr. R. Rupasinghum       -     SLTS-I,


                                              Language Editing
                                           Dr. Chandra Amarasekara

                                               Diagrams
                                    Mrs. N.R.D. Dahanayake- Teacher,
                                  Lyceum International school, Nugegoda

                                               Cover & Type setting
                                               Mrs. R. R. K. Pathirana
                                               Technical Assitant- NIE

                                                 Supporting Staff
                                        Mrs.
Resource Book - Gr.12                                               G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
                                            Content

 Message of the Director General, NIE                                         iii
 Message of the Director Department of Science , NIE                          iv
 Team of Resource Persons                                                   v-vi

Unit 01-Introduction to Biology
         Nature scope and importance of biology with reference to             01
         challenges faced by the mankind
         The nature and the organizational patterns of the living world       04

Unit02- Chemical and cellular basis of life
         Elemental composition of organisms                                   07
         Physical and chemical properties of water important for life         07
         Chemical nature and functions of main organic compounds
         of organisms                                                         09
          Contribution of microscope to the expansion of knowledge
         on cells and cellular organization                                   22
         Historical background of the cell and analyses the
         structure and functions of the sub cellular units                    24
         The cell cycle and the process of cell division                      39
         The energy relationships in metabolic processes                      49
         The role of Enzymes in regulating metabolic reactions                51
         Photosynthesis as an energy ﬁxing mechanism                          58
         Cellular respiration as a process of obtaining energy                67

Unit 03-Evolution and diversity of organisms
         The theories of origin of life and natural selection to analyze
         the process of evolution of life                                     72
         Hierarchy of taxa on scientiﬁc basis                                 77
         The diversity of organisms within the Domain Bacteria                82
The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Protista                        84
         The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Plantae                86
         The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Fungi                  94
         The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Animalia               96
         The characteristic features to study organisms belonging to
         phylum Chordata                                                     103
Unit 04- Plant form and function
            Structure, growth and development of plants                      106
            plant tissues systems                                            109
            Growth and development process of a plant                        115
            The shoot architecture and light capture                         120
            The process of gaseous exchange in plants                        121
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book -Gr.12


            Acquisition of water and minerals                            126
            Process involved in transport of materials in phloem         132
            Processes of water loss in plants                            134
            The modes of nutrition of plants                             137
            Nutritional requirements for the optimal growth of plants    138
            Trends in life cycles, to relate the adaptations of
            plants for a terrestrial life                                141
            Structures and functions associated with sexual
            reproduction in ﬂowering plants                              146
            Responses of plants to different stimuli                     150
            The role of plant growth substances/regulators/hormones in
            response to different                                        152
            Response of plants to some biotic and abiotic stresses       154

Unit 05- Animal form and function

            Relate the structure of animal tissues to their functions    156
            Nutrition in animals                                         163
            Human digestive system to its functions                      165
            Circulatory systems in animals                               181
            Basic plan of blood circulatory system and lymphatic         185
            Gas exchange in animals                                      200
            Immunity                                                     212
            Osmoregulation and excretion                                 222
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




    Introduction to Biology

Nature scope and importance of biology with
reference to challenges faced by the mankind


   B     iology is a Science which is focused on studying of living organisms. (Bios- Life,
         logos ”study of”)
    The conceptof “LIFE” is not easy to deﬁne. Still scientists are unable to provide an
    acceptable deﬁnition for life.
    “Life” is something special and unique which cannot be explained using laws of
    chemistry and physics.
    Biology is a subject which is very complex and vast. Hence for the convenience
    of studying, it has been divided into three primary braches: Zoology (the study of
    animals), Botany (study of plants) and Microbiology (study of microorganisms). Some
    areas of study in these branches:
    • Cell Biology (studying cells)
    • Histology (studying tissues)
    • Anatomy (studying about gross structure of the body)
    • Physiology (studying function)
    • Biochemistry (studying biological molecules)
    • Genetics (studying inheritance)
    • Ecology (studying environment)
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
                           Issues pertaining to Biology
Understanding biological Diversity
  At present our planet is rich in diversity. Life on earth formed around 3.8 billion
  years ago. The ﬁrst formed organisms are believed to be heterotrophic, anaerobic
  prokaryotes. Since then the evolutionary process resulted in the extensive biodiversity
  which exists in the biosphere now.
   Scientists assume, based on their studies that there are about 10 to over 100 million
   species in the world. There is a dynamic relationship between living world and the
   inanimate world and each and every organism has a speciﬁc role in the environment
   for existence of the Biosphere.
   The variety of life on earth, the number of species of plants, animals and microorganisms,
   the diversity of genes in these species, the different ecosystems on the earth such as
   deserts, rainforests and coral reefs are all part of a biologically diverse earth.


Understanding the human Body and its functions
  When studying biology,especially by studying histology, anatomy of the human
  body,one can gain the knowledge about the structure of the organs. This results
  in understanding and appreciation of the organization of the human body and
  understanding the functions of different organ systems and the relationship between
  structure and functions.


Sustainable use and Management of natural resources and Environment
  Natural resources are sources of materials and energy found naturally which are used
  in everyday life and for economic development.
   These natural resources are limited on earth. Due to the increase of growth rate of
   human population, overuse of natural resources is taking place. It causes threat of
   depletion of natural resources.
   Due to over exploitation of natural resources, various environmental problems arise
   such as;
      • Environmental pollution
      • Loss of Biodiversity
      • Desertiﬁcation
   Hence to overcome the above problems management of natural resources and
   Environment should be practiced. Knowledge of Biology is useful to bring about
   remedies for the above problems.


Sustainable Food production
  Sustainable food production is the production of sufﬁcient amounts of food for the
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    human population using environmentally safe methods.
    The current human population is about 7 billion and expected to be double in less than
    40 years. Therefore, for the survival of human beings sustainable food production is
    necessary.
    To maintain sustainable food production following methods can be applied, which are
    based on knowledge in biology.


       • Production of high yielding varieties of plants and animals.
       • Production of disease resistant plants and animal varieties.
       • Improve the post harvest technological methods.


Understanding plant life
  Plants are the primary producers in the world. All the animals depend directly or
  indirectly on plants. Therefore understanding plant life is important. As the time human
  population is increasing we need to increase the productivity. Therefore understanding
  plant function and biology is important to produce high yielding plants, disease
  resistant plants, etc.


Understanding diseases and causes
  To maintain healthy human body one should have the knowledge of causes of the
  diseases and their effects.
    Some dangerous diseases which exist in current world are non communicable diseases
    such as cancers, heart diseases, diabetes, chronic renal diseases and communicable
    diseases such as dengue, AIDS, etc.


    Cancers- causes for this is not fully understood yet. Cancers are one of the leading
    causes of death .
    AIDS- is a viral disease which is a serious and growing health problem worldwide.


    Heart diseases- This is also a serious and growing health problem worldwide. Causes
    are not fully understood yet.


    Chronic renal diseases- In Sri Lanka, recentlyCKDu has become a serious health
    problem.
    Currently scientists are working on prevention, remedial measures and cures for such
    diseases.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                             Resource Book

Solving some legal and ethical issues
  Knowledge and application of biological concepts is important in solving some legal
  issues, such as parentage testing, in criminal investigations and to solve immigration
  disputes.
   DNA ﬁngerprinting is used in above circumstances.


The nature and the organizational patterns of the living world
   In accordance with different criteria we can see a diversity among living organisms.
   Organisms are diverse based on size, shape, form and habitats.
      • Living organisms show a wide range of variation in size, shape, form and habitat.
      • Size – Bacteria – 0.25 µm – 2 µm to Giant Sequoia (Giant Red Wood)– 100m
      • Shape – Organisms are diverse in shape, Ex: Cylindrical (earth worm), streamline
        shape(birds, ﬁsh)
      • Form –Unicellular (Amoeba), multicellular (any plant or animal)
      • Habitat – Terrestrial (Rat), aquatic (Fish), arboreal (Loris), aerial(Birds)


Characteristics of organisms
  In order to survive, each organism whether simple or complex must be able to perform
  certain functions. Following features are the characteristics of organisms.
(i) Order and organization
   From molecular level to biosphere there is an order and organization in organisms to
   perform their biological activities efﬁciently.
   Lower level components are organized in a methodical pattern in upper level to make
   it most efﬁcient.e.g: plant leaf and human eyes.


(ii) Metabolism
    The sum of all chemical activities taking place in an organism is its metabolism. It
    includes catabolic reactions and anabolic reactions.


(iii) Growth and development
    All organisms begin their life as a single cell. During growth an irreversible increase
    in dry mass occurs, which is characterized only by the living. Irreversible changes that
    occur during the life span of an organism is development.Growth and development are
    two consequent processes that happen in the life span of organisms.


(iv) Irritability and coordination
   Irritability is the ability to respond to stimuli from both internal and external environment.
   Movement of organisms occurs as a result of irritability and coordination. In animals
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    this happens as a result of coordinated efforts of nervous, hormonal, muscular and
    skeletal systems


(v) Adaptation
   Adaptation is a peculiarity of structure, physiology or behavior that promotes the
   likelihood of an organism’s survival and reproduction in a particular environment.
   E.g: Sunken stomata in Xerophytes, Viviparity in some mangroves, Splayed out foot
   in camels.


(vi) Reproduction
   Ability to produce offspring for continuous existence of species


(vii) Heredity & Evolution
    Organisms have genes that pass from one generation to the next and control speciﬁc
    physiological, morphological and behavioral characters of organisms.
    Ability of organisms to change over time as a result of genetic modiﬁcation is evolution
    Many non living entities may have one or more of these characteristics but not all
    of them e.g., crystals grow, waves move but only living organisms display all these
    characteristics simultaneously or at some point during their life cycle.
    By considering this it can be said that these are occurring in single celled organisms
    as well as highly complex organisms such as humans and Anthophytes (ﬂowering
    plants).


Hierarchiel levels of organization of living things
    The cell is the basic structural and functional unit of life. Some organisms are unicellular
    while others are multicellular.Cell is composed of several organells which are formed
    by different organic molecules.Then hierarchieal levels of organization of living things
    can be constructed by using relevant examples at each level.
    Molecules,Organells, Cells, Tissues, Organs, Organ systems, Organisms, Populations,
    Communities, Ecosystems, Biosphere
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book




02

    Chemical and cellular basis of life


Elemental composition of living matter


   T   here are about ninety two elements naturally occur in earth’s crust. Of which,
       about 20-25% elements are essential to continue healthy life and reproduction.
   (about 25- elements are essential for humans and about 17 for plants).
   Oxygen (O), Carbon (C), Hydrogen (H), and Nitrogen (N) make up 96% of living
   matter.
   Calcium (Ca), Phosphorous (P), potassium (K) and sulphur (S)- make up most of the
   remaining 4% of the mass of the organism.


   In humans, C, H, O, N- accounts for 96.3% of the body mass and Ca, P, K, S, Na, Cl,
   Mg and trace elements accounts for the remaining 3.7%. (e.g. B (Boron) , Co (Cobalt),
   Cu (Copper), Cr (Chromium), F (Fluorine), I (Iodine), Fe (Iron),
   Mo (Molybdenum), Mn (Manganese), Se (Selenium), Si (Silicon), Sn (Tin), V
   (Vanadium), Zn (Zinc)


Physical and chemical properties of water important for life
  Water is a vital inorganic molecule; life could not exist on this planet without water. It
  is important due to following reasons,


   1. Vital chemical constituent of living cell
   2. Provides a biological medium for all organisms


    Most of above properties are based on the chemical structure of water molecule.
   Physical and chemical properties of water molecule provide the ability to render the
   vitality. Water molecule is a small, polar and angular molecule.
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                                                              δ+ partial positive
                                                              δ-partial negative




                Fig 2.1: Chemical structure of the water molecule


    Polarity is an uneven charge distribution within a molecule. In water molecule, oxygen
    atom is slightly negative and hydrogen atom is slightly positive. Weak attractions
    between the slightly polar hydrogen atom of one water molecule and the slightly
    polar oxygen atom of adjacent water molecuole are known as hydrogen bonds.These
    hydrogen bonds play a major role in maintaining all the properties of water.




                Fig 2.2: Hydrogen bonding in water
    The properties of water arise due to attractions of different water molecules. When the
    water is in liquid form its H bonds are very fragile. H bonds form, break and reform
    with great frequency.


    Four major properties of water to maintain life on earth
       • Cohesive behavior
       • Ability to moderate temperature
       • Expansion upon freezing
       • Versatility as a solvent
    Properties of water related to functions
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
1. Cohesive behavior
   Attraction between water molecules due to hydrogen bonding is known as cohesion.
   Attraction between water molecules and other substances are known as adhesion. Both
   of the above properties of water allow it to act as a transport medium.
   Due to cohesion between water molecules, water and dissolved substances such as
   minerals and nutrients transport through vascular tissues, xylem and phloem against
   gravity.
   Adhesion between water molecules and cell walls also helps in conduction of water
   and dissolved substances.
   Water has a high surface tension. This ability is given to water molecules, due to
   cohesion between the water molecules. Therefore, in an aquatic system, upper surface
   water molecules are attracted by lower surface molecules and it forms a water ﬁlm.
   Small insects e.g. water skaters can walk on the surface of a pond.


2. Ability to moderate temperature
   Water can absorb or release a relatively high amount of heat energy by a slight change
   in its own temperature.
   Due to the high speciﬁc heat, water will function as thermal buffer in living system and
   aquatic bodies during the temperature ﬂuctuations on earth.
   Due to the high heat of vaporization, with the minimum loss of water an organism can
   release much heat energy. Therefore, body surface of an organism maintained as cool
   surface.
   e.g. Prevent from overheating.


   Evaporation of sweat from human skin helps to maintain the body temperature at
   constant level.
   Transpiration in plants keeps the plant body surface as a cool surface and prevent from
   becoming too warm in the sunlight.


3. Expansion upon freezing
   Generally, in an increase in temperature of any substances, reduces their density and
   on the other hand, in a decrease in temperature increases their density. When the
   temperature of water falls below 4 ˚C, it begins to freeze and forms a crystalline lattice
   called ice cubes. Therefore water has the maximum density at 4˚C.Hence, ice ﬂoats
   on the surface of water bodies. It is an important property of water in polar regions,
   where, organisms in aquatic bodies can survive during the winter.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

4. Versatility as a solvent
   This ability is given to water due to their polarity. Polar molecules (e.g. Glucose), non
   polar ionic (e.g. NaCl), both polar and ionic (e.g. lysozymes) can dissolve in water,
   because water molecules surround each of the solute molecules and form hydrogen
   bonds with them. Solubility depends on polarity and not in their ionic nature.


Chemical Nature and Functions of Main Organic Compounds of
Organisms

Carbohydrates
  Most abundant group of organic compound on earth is carbohydrates. Major elemental
  composition is C, H, and O. Hydrates of carbon contain the same proportion of H: O
  which equals to 2:1 as in water.General formula is Cx(H2O)y. Three major groups of
  carbohydrates are monosaccharides, disaccharides and polysaccharides.
    Generally carbohydrates include sugars (monosaccharides and disaccharides) and
    polysaccharides.


Monosaccharides
 The simplest form of carbohydrates having general molecular formula as (CH2O)n are
 monosaccharide. Where C varies from 3-7 . All monosaccharide are reducing sugars,
 water soluble and occur in crystalline form.
    According to the number of carbon atoms, they are named as;
       • 3C- Triose e.g. Glyceraldehydes (Phosphoglyceraldehyde is a derivative of
         Triose)
       • 4C- Tetroses.g. Erythrose (rare in nature)
       • 5C- Pentoses.g. Ribose, Deoxyribose, Ribulose (RUBP is a derivative of ribulose)
       • 6C- Hexoses e.g. Glucose, Fructose, Galactose
    According to the type of carbonyl (Keto, aldo)group, they are classiﬁed as;
    a. Aldoses-glucose, galactose
    b. Ketoses-fructose
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                        Resource Book

    Aldose

       C                O                       Aldehyde                CH2OH

                                                group
                                                                                  O
               C                                                                          H

                                                                                  H
       H       C        OH
                                                                                          OH

       HO      C         H                                                        OH


        H          C     OH


        H          C     OH

                   CH2OH


                        Fig 2.3: Solid form of glucose      Fig 2.4: Aqueous form of Glucose
                                                                   molecule
    Ketose
                   C1H2OH
                                                                        O             H
                                     Keto group           CH2OH
                                                                                      C
               2
               C             O                               C
                                                                   H        OH
                                                           OH                          CH2OH
         H         C3       OH
                                                                    C         C

           H       C4        OH                                   OH          H


        H          C5        OH


                       C6H2OH

                        Fig 2.5: Solid form of fructose           Fig 2.6: Aqueous form of fructose


    In aqueous media some monosaccharides are in ring form (No need to memorize the
    chemical structures)
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Disaccharides
  They are sugars formed by joining two monosaccharides by a glycosidic bond.




                 Fig 2.7: Formation of sucrose    Fig 2.8: Formation of maltose
    (no need to memorize the chemical structures)


    Glycosidic bond is formed by removal of a water molecule from two adjacent
    monosaccharides by a condensation reaction. Water molecule is formed from OH group
    of one monosaccharide molecule and H from adjoining monosaccharide molecule.


    Glucose + Glucose         Condensation            Maltose + H20
    Glucose + fructose        Condensation              Sucrose + H20
                               Condensation
    Glucose + Galactose                               Lactose + H20
    Maltose and lactose are reducing sugars and sucrose is a non reducing sugar.
Polysaccharides
  They are macromolecules and biopolymers. Polysaccharides are made up of few
  hundred to a few thousand monosaccharide subunits
    They are non crystalline, water insoluble, and not considered as sugars.
    Some polysaccharides act as storage components where others contribute to the
    structure of living organisms. Based on their function they are categorized as storage
    polysaccharides and structural polysaccharides.
       • Storage- Starch, Glycogen
       • Structural- Cellulose, Hemicellulose, Pectin
    Based on their architecture they are categorized as
       • Linear forms- Cellulose, Amylose
       • Branched forms- Glycogen, Amylopectin, Hemicellulose
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                              Resource Book


                 Table 2.1: Major polysaccharides, their monomers and functions
       Polysaccharide             Monomer                 Functions

       Starch                     Glucose                 Stored in plants

       Glycogen                   Glucose                 Stored in animals and
                                                          fungi
       Cellulose                  Glucose                 Component of Cell
                                                          wall
       Inuline                    Fructose                Stored in tubers of
                                                          Dhalia
       Pectin                     Galacturonic acid       Component of Middle
                                                          lamella of plant cell
                                                          wall
       Hemicellulose              Pentose                 Component of Plant
                                                          cell walls
       Chitin (nitrogen           Glucosamine             Component         of
       containing                                         Fungal cell walls
       polysaccharide)                                    and exoskeleton of
                                                          Arthropods


                           Functions of carbohydrates
Monosaccharides
    • Energy source
      • Building blocks of disaccharides and polysaccharides (disaccharides such as
        maltose, sucrose and polysaccharides such as starch, glycogen)
      • Components of nucleotides (DNA, RNA)
Disaccharides
      • Storage sugar in milk- Lactose
      • Translocation in phloem –Sucrose
      • Storage sugar in sugarcane- Sucrose
Polysaccharides
  a.) Storage polysaccharides-
      • starch stores glucose as energy source in plants and chlorophytes
      • glycogen stores glucose as energy source in animals and fungi
      • inulin stores fructose as energy source in Dahlia tubers
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    b.) structural polysaccharides-
       • Cellulose in the cell walls of plants and chlorophytes
       • Pectin in the middle lamella of plant tissues.
       • Hemicellulose in cell walls of plants.
       • Peptidoglycan in the cell walls of prokaryotes.
       • Chitin in the cell walls of fungi and in exoskeleton in Arthropods.


Lipids
     • Diverse group of hydrophobic molecules
       • Large biological molecules but not considered as polymers or macromolecules.
       • Consist of C, H, O and H:O ratio is not 2:1. Comparatively more H are present.
       • Biologically important types of lipids: Fats, Phospholipids and Steroids.
Fats
  Fats are made up of glycerol and fatty acids; Glycerol belongs to alcohol group having
  3 carbons where each of them bear single hydroxyl group. Fatty acids are hydrocarbon
  chains with long (16-18) carbon skeleton with a carboxyl group at its one terminal.
    Fatty acid molecules bind to each hydroxyl group of glycerol by ester bond. Resulting
    fat molecules are called as triacylglycerol.




                 Fig 2.9: Formation of Triacylglycerol
    Hydrocarbon chains of fatty acids contribute to the hydrophobic nature of the fats.
    Based on the nature of hydrocarbon chains of fatty acids, they are categorized as


     a) Saturated fats- fats are made up of saturated fatty acids: fatty acids with hydrocarbons
         having no any double bonds. Usually animal fats come under this category. They
         are mostly solid at room temperature. e.g: butter


     b) Unsaturated fats- fats are made up of unsaturated fatty acids- fatty acids with
        hydrocarbons having one or more double bonds. Usually plant fats come under
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                      Resource Book

        this category. They are mostly liquid in room temperature. e.g: vegetable oils.
        Unsaturated fats may classify based on the nature of their double bonds. a) Cis
        Unsaturated fat b) Trans Unsaturated fat
   Consumption of excess saturated fats and trans unsaturated fats contribute
   arthrosclerosis.


   Phospholipids
   Phospholipids are major components of the cell membranes. They are composed of two
   fatty acids and one phosphate group attached to one glycerol molecule. The phosphate
   group gives the negative electrical charge to the phospholipid molecule. Typically an
   additional polar molecule or small charged molecule is also linked to the phosphate
   group e.g. choline.


   The two ends of the phospholipids show different behavior. The hydrocarbon tails are
   hydrophobic while phosphate group and its attachment (head) are hydrophilic.



                                              Choline


                                              Phosphate

                                             Glycerol



                                            Fatty acids




                    (a) Strucural formula                 (b) Space - ﬁlling model



                                                   (no need to memorize the structure)
                 Fig 2.10: structure of the phospholipid molecule


                                    Functions of Lipids
   • food reserve as energy source (triglycerides such as fats and oils)
   • maintain the ﬂuidity of plasma membrane (phospholipids, cholestrol)
   • act as signaling molecules (eg. Hormones) that travel through the body
   • found as components of animal cell membrane (cholesterol)
Resource Book                                                         G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
                                          Protein

    Proteins are made up of amino acids. Twenty different amino acids are involved in
    the formation of proteins. Elemental composition is C, H,O,N and S. At the centre of
    the amino acid is an asymmetric carbon atom except in glycine. Each amino acid is
    composed of an amino group, a carboxyl group, a hydrogen atom and a variable group
    symbolized by R, which is an alkyl group. In the case of glycine R is replaced by H
    atom. The R group also called the ‘side chain’ differs with each amino acid where as
    the other groups are in the ‘ back bone’ (including the H atom).
                                                      Alkyl Group




           Amine                                                             Carboxyl
           Group                                                             Group




                      Fig 2.11: Structure of an Amino acid molecule


    Amino acids may have one or more carboxyl groups and amino groups. Amino group
    has alkaline nature and carboxyl group has acidic nature. When both characteristics
    are found in one molecule they are known as amphoteric molecules. Therefore, amino
    acids are amphoteric.
    Two Amino acids undergo condensation reaction by removing a water molecule from
    both and result a bond known as peptide bond;




                Fig 2.12: Formation of peptide bond
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                 Resource Book
   Protein is composed of one or more polypeptide chains which are composed of amino
   acids.


Levels of protein structures
  There are four levels of structure which play important roles in their functions;
  a) Primary
  b) Secondary
  c) Tertiary
  d) Quaternary


a) Primary structure
   The unique sequence of linearly arranged amino acids linked by peptide bonds is the
   primary structure of proteins.


b). Secondary structure
   The primary structure of a single polypeptide chain coils and folds, as a result of
   intra molecular hydrogen bonds between the oxygen atoms and the hydrogen atoms
   attached to the nitrogen atoms, of the same poly peptide chain backbone, to form the
   secondary structure, which is either β pleated or alpha helical.
   • Alpha helix- e.g.Keratin.
   • β pleated sheet e.g.spider’s silk ﬁber




                 Fig 2.13: beta pleated sheet and alpha helix of secondary structures of proteins
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

b) Tertiary structure
   Usually the secondary polypeptide chain bends and folds extensively forming a precise
   compact unique, functional and three-dimensional shape resulting from following
   interactions between the side chain/ R-group of amino acids;
    • H bonds
    • Disulphide bonds
    • Ionic bonds
    • Van der Waals interactions/ Hydrophobic interactions
       e.g.most of the enzymes, myoglobin, albumin


c) Quaternary structure
   Aggregation of two or more polypeptide chains involve in the formation of one
   functional protein. Separate chains are called protein subunits which were held together
   by inter and intra-molecular interactions.
    e.g.Haemoglobin, Collagen

                                          Heme

                                   Iron                            β subunit

                        α subunit


                                                                    α subunit
                       β subunit




                                          Hemoglobin
                          Fig 2.14: structure of the hemoglobin molecule
Denaturation of proteins
  Denaturation of protein is the loss of speciﬁc chemical three dimensional shape due to
  the alteration of weak chemical bonds and interactions.


Agents affecting the denaturation
  1. High temperature and high energy radiation
    2. Strong acids, alkaline and high concentrations of salts
    3. Heavy metals
    4. Organic solvents and detergents
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                 Resource Book

Functions of the proteins
   Table 2.2 Functions of Proteins
       Type of protein                Example                     Functions
       Catalytic protein           Pepsin, Amylase         Catalyze       biochemical
                                                           reaction
       Structural protein          Keratin,                Prevent desiccation
                                   Collagen                Provide strength and
                                                           support
       Storag e                    Ovalbumin               Storage protein in egg
                                   Casein                  Storage protein in milk
       Transport                   Haemoglobin             Transport O2 and CO2
                                   Serum albumin           Transport fatty acids
       Hormones                    Insulin                 Regulate blood glucose
                                   Glucagon                level
       Contractile/ Motor          Actin/Myosin            Contraction of muscle
                                                           ﬁbres
       Defensive                   Immunoglobins           Eliminate foreign bodies


Nucleic acids
  Nucleic acids are Polymers exist as polynucleotides made up of monomers called
  nucleotides. They contain C, H, O, N and P. Nucleic acids are macromolecules,
  biopolymers. There are two types of Nucleic acids: DNA (Deoxyribo nucleic acids)
  and RNA (Ribonucleic acids).


Structure of nucleotides
   Nucleotides have 3 components; namely pentose sugar, nitrogenous base and a
   phosphate group


        Phosphae Group



                                     Nitrogenous Base



            Pentose Sugar



                  Fig 2.15: Structure of nucleotides ( no need to memorize chemical structures)
A nucleotide without a phosphate group is called a nucleoside.e.g. Adenosine,
Guanosine
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Pentose sugar
  Pentose sugars are two types; namely Deoxy ribose and ribose (in deoxyribose one
  oxygen atom is less than in ribose)


Nitrogenous bases
   There are two major groups of nitrogenous bases:
    1. Purines- larger in size with two rings
    2. Pyrimidines- smaller in size with a single ring


    In purines there are two types; namely Adenine, Guanine. In pyrimidens there are three
    types, Thyamine, Uracil and Cytocine. Bases are commonly represented by letters A,
    G, T, U and C respectively.

Phosphate group
  It gives the nucleic acids the acidic nature.

Formation of nucleic acids
  Millions of nucleotides join by phospho-di-ester bond to form polynucleotide chains
  by condensation between the –OH group of the phosphate of one nucleotide with the
  –OH attached to 3rd carbon of pentose sugar of the other. These bonds results in a
  backbone with a repeating pattern of sugar-phosphate units. Nucleic acids are linear
  polymers of nucleotides. There are two kinds of nucleic acids depending on the type of
  the sugar molecules involved. If the sugar molecule in the nucleotide is deoxyribose,the
  nucleic acid is (DNA). If the pentose sugar is ribose, then the nucleic acid is RNA.
  DNA contains Adenine, Thymine, Guanine and Cytosine and RNA contains Adenine,
  Guanine, Cytosine and Uracil.


Structure of DNA molecule (Watson and Crick model)
   DNA molecules have two anti-parallel polynucleotide chains that spiral around an
   imaginary axis, forming a double helix. The two sugar-phosphate backbones run in
   opposite directions from each other, and the arrangement is referred to as anti-parallel.
   The sugar phosphate backbones are on the outside of the helix, and the nitrogenous
   bases are paired in the interior of the helix. The two strands are held together by
   hydrogen bonds between the paired nitrogen bases.


Base pair rule
  Always a purine base, pairs with a speciﬁc,pyrimidine base,
    A=T (2 hydrogen bonds)
    G≡C (3 hydrogen bonds)
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                           Resource Book
   Hence two chains (strands) are said to be complementary to each other. These pairs
   are known as complementary base pairs.In this original double helical structure, one
   complete turn consists of ten base pairs as shown in the diagram.




 Fig2.16: The structure of the DNA and RNA molecules ( no need to memorize chemical structures)


Functions of DNA
     • Store and transmit genetic information from one generation to the next generation
      • Store the genetic information for protein synthesis


Structure of RNA
   This is normally a single stranded nucleic acid composed of ribo-nucleotides containing
   bases, Uracil (U), Cytosine (C ), Guanine (G), Adenine (A). Complementary base
   pairing between two RNA molecules or within the same molecule may occur in some.
   Complementary base pairing facilitates three dimensional shapes essential for their
   functioning. Adenine binds with Uracil with two hydrogen bonds and Guanine binds
   with Cytosine with three hydrogen bonds. There are three types of RNA present in
   cells,
   1. Messenger RNA (mRNA)
   2. Transfer RNA (tRNA)
   3. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

1. Messenger RNA
   Messenger RNA is a linear molecule and is the least abundant type of RNA in a cells
   comparatively. There are two functions;


       • Copies the genetic information stored in DNA molecule as a sequence of
         nitrogenous bases
       • Transports genetic information from nucleoplasam to the site of protein synthesis
         (ribosome) through nucleopores


2. Transfer RNA (tRNA)
   Smallest RNA molecule. Linear, but forms three- looped structure as shown in the
   diagram.




        Fig 2.17: Structure of the tRNA molecule


    Function - transportation of amino acids to the site of protein synthesis.
3. Ribosomal RNA
   It is the most abundant type of RNA. rRNA has a complex irregular structure. It
   provides the site where polypeptide chains are assembled.


Differences between DNA and RNA

    1. DNA is double stranded molecule while RNA is a single stranded molecule.
    2. DNA consists of A, T, G and C and absence of U, while RNA consists
       of A,U, G and C and absence of T
    3. Sugar molecule in RNA is ribose, while in DNA it is deoxyribose.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book
Nucleotides other than those found in nucleic acids
  ATP, NAD+, NADP+, FAD and their functions


   Functions of ATP
   • Universal energy carrier
   Functions of NAD+
   • Act as a coenzyme
   • Act as an electron carrier
   • Function as an oxidizing agent during respiration
   Functions of NADP+
   • Act as coenzymes
   • Act as an electron carrier
   • NADP+ act as a reducing agent in photosynthesis
   Functions of FAD
   • Act as a coenzyme
   • Act as an electron carrier


Contribution of microscope to the expansion of knowledge on cells and
cellular organization

   Advancement of the cytology is mostly based on the microscopy. The discovery and
   early study of cells progressed with the invention of microscope.


Light microscope
  Visible light is passed through the specimen and then through glass lenses. The lenses
  refract the light in such a way that the image of the specimen is magniﬁed as it is
  projected into the eye.The simplest microscope is a single lens.


The compound light microscope
   Compound light microscopes are commonly used in school laboratories and it is used
   in medical laboratories as a diagnostic tool.
   Resolution power and magniﬁcation are important parameters which can be seen in a
   microscope.
   Magniﬁcation is ratio of an object’s image size to its actual size. Usually the maximum
   magniﬁcation of light microscope is 1000 times the actual size of the specimen)
   Resolution power is minimum distance between two points that can be distinguished
   as separate points (resolution power of light microscope is 0.2µm). It is a measure of
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    the clarity of the image.
    Magniﬁcation is limited due to the resolution.
    Light from an object (specimen on the slide) passes ﬁrst through objective lens. Then
    produce a magniﬁed image.
    Above image then acts as an object for the second lens (the eye piece lens) which
    further magniﬁes it.


    The total magniﬁcation is hence the product of the magniﬁcation of each lens.

                                   Magniﬁcation of              Magniﬁcation of
          Total magniﬁcation =                           X
                                   objective lens               objective lens

     e.g- .If magniﬁcation of Objective lens = ×40, eyepiece =×15


                Total is =15 × 40= ×600 time magniﬁed


The Electron Microscope
  The limitation imposed upon the resolution power of the light microscope by the
  wavelength of light. The resolution power is inversely proportional to the wavelength.
  Due to this, scientists considered the use of other forms of radiations with comparatively
  shorter wavelengths.
    As a result, electron microscopes were developed. In electron microscopy, a beam of
    electrons is focused through the specimen or on to its surface.
    This means, that in theory, the electron microscope should be able to magnify objects
    up to 1×108 times. In practice, it magniﬁes just over 5×105 times.
    Electron microscopes have revealed many organelles and other sub cellular structures
    those were impossible to resolve with the light microscopes.
    There are two types of electron microscopes.
    1. Transmission electron microscopes (TEM)
    2. Scanning electron microscopes(SEM)


Transmission electron microscopes
  It is used to study the internal structures of cells.In this microscope, a beam of electrons
  is passed through a thin, especially prepared slice of material. A very thin specimen
  is used. Specimens stained with heavy metals which attach more to certain cellular
  structures than other areas. Image reﬂects the pattern of electrons passed through the
  specimen, displays on a screen. While electrons pass through the specimen, more
  electrons may get displayed in regions where structures were densely stained.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book
Scanning electron microscopes
  In this instrument, a ﬁne beam of electrons is reﬂected from the surface of specimen.
  Specimen is mostly coated with gold prior to observation. Here the specimen scatters
  many electrons whereas others are absorbed. This instrument is ideal to observe the
  surface view in three dimensional appearances.


   Table 2.3: Differences between light and electron microscope
       Light Microscope                               Electron microscope
        Glass lenses are used to focus the         Powerful magnets are used to
       light rays                                  focus beam of electrons
       Image is directly detected by naked         Not directrly detected by naked
       eye                                         eye, micrographs are used
       Living and non living objects can           Only non-living objects are
       be observed                                 observed
       Actual color of the object can be           Actual color cannot be observed.
       observed                                    Images are developed
       Dyes used to stain the object               Heavy metals are used to stain
                                                   the object


Historical background of the cell and analyses the structure and
functions of the sub cellular units

Cell theory
  All organisms are composed of cells.
   Recall the hierarchy of life, the levels of organization mentioned earlier. The basic
   unit which can be called “living” is the cell, which may form a single celled organism
   (e.g.Chlamydomonas, Yeast) or a multi-cellular plant or animal. The cell is the basic
   structural and functional unit of life.
   The level of organization of matter represented by a cell shows all the characteristics
   of life. Any stage below level of a cell cannot be considered living, whether it is a
   single celled organism or multi-cellular plant or an animal.
   Robert Hooke (1665) examined a cork using simple microscope and gave the term
   “CELL” to describe the basic units.
   Anton Van Leeuwenhook (1650), a contemporary of Robert Hooke, was the ﬁrst to
   describe and record living single celled organisms, Euglena & bacteria
   Matthias Schleiden (1831), a botanist, studying plant tissues concluded that all plants
   are made up of cells.
   Theodore Schwann a zoologist (1839) concluded that animal tissues are also made up
   of cells.
Resource Book                                                            G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Rudolf Virchow (1855) showed that all cells arise from pre-existing cells by cell
    division,
    Schleiden, Schwann and Virchow presented the ‘Cell Theory’ which included the
    following.
         1.All organisms are composed of one or more cells.
         2.The basic structural and functional unit of organisms is the cell.
         3.All cells arise from pre-existing cells.


Organization of cells
  There are two kinds of cellular organization - Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic
    All cells share certain basic features. They are;
       • All cells are bounded by a plasma membrane which is a selective barrier
       • Within the cell have, a semiﬂuid, jelly like substance which is called cytosol.
         Subcellular components are suspended within the cytosol.
       • They carry DNA as genetic materials.
       • Ribosomes are found in all cells



    Table 2.4: The differences between Prokaryotic cells and Eukaryotic cells
        Feature                 Prokaryote                 Eukaryote
     organism            Bacteria, Archaebacteria Protists,Fungi, plants, animals
     Cell size           Average diameter 1-5µm 10µm-100µm diameter
     Form                Mainly unicellular     Mainly multicellular (except most of
                                                protista and some fungi are unicellular)

     Evolutionary        3.5 billion years ago      1.8 billion years ago ,evolved from
     origin                                         prokaryotes
     Cell division       Binary ﬁssion,             Mitosis, meiosis, or both;
                         no mitosis and
                         meiosis
     Genetic material    DNA is circular and lies   DNA is linear and contained in a nucleus.
                         free in the cytoplasm.     DNA is associated with proteins
                         This region is called
                         nucleoid, DNA is naked
                         and not associated with
                         proteins
     Type of ribosomes   70s ribosome (smaller)     Both 70s (Mitochondria and Chloroplast)
                                                    and 80s ribosomes (larger) present (may
                                                    attach to endoplasmic reticulum)
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                    Resource Book

    Organelles          Few organelles, none       Many organelles, membrane bounded
                        are surrounded by          organelles present. Great diversity of
                        membrane                   organelles.
                        Internal membranes         e.g. nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts
                        scarces; if present        bounded by two membranes.
                        usually associated         e.g. Lysosomes, Vacuole, bounded by
                        with respiration,          single membrane.
                        photosynthesis and N2
                        ﬁxation.


    Cell walls          Peptidoglycan              Cell walls of green plants and fungi
                        present in Bacteria        are rigid and contain polysaccharides;
                        and cyanobacteria,         cellulose in plant cell walls and chitin in
                        polysaccharide and         fungal walls (none in animal cells)
                        protein present in
                        Archae bacteria
    Flagella            Simple, lacking            Complex, with ‘9+2’ arrangement of
                        microtubules;              microtubules; intracellular (surrounded by
                        extracellular (not         cell surface membrane) 200nm diameter
                        enclosed by cell surface
                        membrane) 20nm
                        diameter
    Respiration         Mostly by mesosomes        Mitochondria for aerobic respiration
    Photosynthesis      No chloroplasts; takes     Chloroplasts containing membranes
                        place on membranes         which are usually stacked into lamellae or
                        which show no stacking     grana
    Nitrogen ﬁxation    Some have the ability      None have the ability


   Bacteria, Cyanobacteria and Achaea are prokaryotic cells. All the other organisms
   have eukaryotic cells.




                 Fig 2.18: Structure of an animal cell
Resource Book                                                G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                   Fig 2.19: Structure of plant cell
Structures and functions of organelles and other subcellular components
    Plasma membrane: Plasmamembrane is the outer limit of cytoplasm. All cellular
    membranes resemble the ultra structure of plasma membrane. In 1972, Singer and
    Nicolson put forward the ﬂuid mosaic model of cell membrane. It is mainly composed
    of;
       • Phospholipids (most abundant type of lipid in plasma membrane)
       • Protein
    The Plasma membrane has the following features. It is about 7nm thick. It is mainly
    made up of a phospholipid bilayer. Phospholipids are amphipathic molecules. The
    hydrophilic heads of the phospholipids face outwards into the aqueous environment of
    both inside and outside of the cell.
    The hydrophobic hydrocarbon tails face inwards and create a hydrophobic interior.
    Plasmamembrane is compared to the ﬂuid mosaic model. Since phospholipid molecules
    are moveable, they provide the ﬂuid nature to the membrane.
    Protein molecules embedded randomly contribute to its mosaic nature.
    Some of the protein molecules penetrate all the way through the membrane, called
    transmembrane proteins and some others penetrate only part of the way into the
    membrane. These are called integral proteins.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book



   Most of the integral proteins are transmembrane proteins which have hydrophilic
   channels. These act as pores through which ions and certain polar molecules can pass.
   Some proteins are not embedded in the lipid bilayer at all, and are loosely bound to the
   inner surface of the membrane, called peripheral proteins.
   Some proteins and lipids have short branching carbohydrate chains like antennae,
   forming glycoprotein and glycolipids, respectively.
   Animal’s cell membrane may contain few cholesterol molecules randomly integrated
   into the lipid bilayer.
   These cholesterol molecules provide ﬂexibility and stability to the membrane
   by reducing membrane ﬂuidity at moderate temperatures and prevent membrane
   solidiﬁcation at low temperatures.
   The two sides of the membrane may differ in composition and function.




                 Fig 2.20: Structure of the plasma membrane
Functions
     • The plasma membrane surrounds the cytoplasm of living cell physically
       separating the intracellular components from the extracellular environment.
      • Plasma membrane is selectively permeable and able to regulate the exchange of
        material needed for survival.
      • Proteins embedded in the plasma membrane identify the cell, enabling nearby
        cells to communicate with each other (involved in cell recognition).
      • Some protein molecules act as receptor molecules for interacting with speciﬁc
        biochemical, such as hormones, neurotransmitters and immune proteins.
      • Some proteins in the cell membrane attach to some cytoskeletal ﬁbers and help
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

          to maintain the shape of the cell.
       • Some proteins in the membrane act as enzymes. (e.g.Microvillus on epithelial
         cell lining of some parts of the gut contains digestive enzymes in their cell
         surface membrane.)


Subcellular components
  There are many sub-cellular components in the cell. Some of them are organelles,
  which are bound by membranes and suspended in the cytosol of eukaryotic cell to
  perform specialized functions.


Nucleus
  Most prominent organelle, consist most of the genes, having an average diameter of
        and enclosed by a double membrane cover called nuclear envelope.
       • Nuclear envelope- composed of two membranes, inner and outer membranes,
         separated by a space of 20-40 nm. Nuclear envelope is perforated by nuclear
         pores which has pore complex to regulate the entry and exit of substances. It has
         nuclear lamina, made up of protein ﬁlaments which line the interior side of the
         nuclear envelope.
       • Nuclear matrix is made up of protein ﬁlaments and extended throughout the
         interior of the nucleus. Chromatin and nucleolus are embedded in the nuclear
         matrix.
       • Nucleolus- appears as darkly stained granules with ﬁbers adjoining part of the
         chromatin.
       • Chromatin –appears as a diffused mass in electron micrographs of non dividing
         cells. It is a complex of DNA and proteins. During nuclear divisions, chromatin
         condenses, tightly coils and form threads, called chromosomes. Each species
         has a constant number of chromosomes. (e.g. typical human cell has 46
         chromosomes).


Functions
     • Control all cellular activities.
       • Synthesize DNA to produce new nuclei for cell divisions.
       • Synthesize rRNAs and ribosomal subunits required for protein synthesis, through
         nucleolus.
       • Synthesize mRNA and tRNA according to the information present on the DNA.
       • Store and transport genetic information.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book


Ribosomes
  These are subcellular components which carryout protein synthesis. They consist of two
  subunits; larger subunit and smaller subunit. They are composed of rRNA and protein.
  Ribosomes are found in two types; 70S and 80S. 70S ribosomes are found freely on
  the cytoplasam of prokaryotes, matrix of mitochondria and stroma of chloroplasts.
  80S ribosomes are found only in eukaryotes. Based on the nature of presence, 80S
  ribosomes are categorized as two types; free ribosomes and bound ribosomes.
   Free ribosomes: freely available as group in cytoplasam. Bound ribosomes are attached
   to the membrane surface of rough endoplasmic reticulum.


   Functions
   Protein synthesis



Endoplasmic reticulum
  It is a network of internal membranes forming ﬂattened or tubular sacs separating
  cytosol from ER lumen. It is continuous with the outer membrane of nuclear envelope.
  There are two types of ER; Rough ER and Smooth ER


Rough ER
  Rough ER consists of ﬂattened sacs, and ribosomes bound to surface. Proteins
  synthesized by ribosomes move into lumen of ER.
   Functions
      • Transport protein synthesized by ribosomes
      • Synthesizing glycoproteins
      • Produce transport vesicles
      • Facilitate the growth of own membrane by adding phospholipids proteins and
        carbohydrates. Therefore called as membrane factory
   Smooth ER
   Smooth ER is a network of tubular sacs without ribosomes. Membrane bound enzymes
   are present.
   Functions
   • It synthesizes lipids including oils, steroids and phospholipids.
   • Metabolism of carbohydrates.
   • Produce transport vesicles to transport within cell.
   • Involves in detoxiﬁcation.
   • Stores Ca2+ ions.
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                Fig 2.21: structure of the endoplasmic reticulum


Golgi apparatus




                Fig 2.22: Structure of the golgi apparatus
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book



   Golgi apparatus is a stacks of ﬂattened sacs or Cisternae. Inner and outer surfaces can
   be identiﬁed as cis face and transface respectively. Cis face is located near the E.R to
   receive vessicles from E.R. Trans face give rise to secretory vessicles which budded
   off and travel other side. Golgi complex is abundant in secretory cells.


Functions
     • Collecting, packaging and distribution of materials
      • Manufacturing cellulose and non cellulose cell wall components such as pectin
      • Produce lysosomes
Lysosomes
  They are single membrane bounded vesicles contributing to digestive activity. They
  contain hydrolytic enzymes which catalyze breakdown of carbohydrates, proteins,
  lipids and nucleic acids.


Functions
  • Digest food particles received by phagocytosis
   • Transport residue material out of cell by exocytosis.
   • Digest worn out organelles
   • Autolysis causing cell death.


Peroxisome
  They are single membrane bounded vesicles with oxidizing enzymes.They are present
  in both plants and animals. Enzymes in peroxysome catalyze the breakdown of H2O2.


Functions
  • Detoxiﬁcation of peroxides
   • Photorespiration in plants
   Specialized peroxysomes called glyoxysomes are found in fat storing tissues in plants.
   Glyoxysomes converts fatty acids into sugar.


Mitochondria
  It is one of the most common organelles in eukaryotic cells. It is an elongated
  organelle with two enclosing membranes. Outer membrane is smooth but the inner
  membrane is convoluted to form cristae. Cristae increase the surface area and they
  contain stalk particles. The gap/space in between inner and outer membranes of the
  mitochondrion is called intermembrane space. The inner most part of the organelle
  is known as mitochondrial matrix, which consists of 70 s ribosomes circular DNA
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    molecule (mitochondrial DNA), phosphate granules and enzymes. The matrix carries
    enzymes for the reactions in Krebs cycle (in cellular respiration). Further, cristae
    composed of proteins and enzymes essential for electron transport chain and oxidative
    phosphorylation.

Functions
  • Synthesize ATP in aerobic respiration
    • Involve in Photorespiration




                 Fig 2.23: Structure of the mitochondria


Chloroplast
  It is a biconvex lens shaped organelle with two membranes which is found in plants
  and some protists. The outer and inner membranes are smooth and are separated by a
  very narrow intermembrane space. Inside the chloroplast there is another membrane
  system. This membrane produces ﬂattened and interconnected sacks called thylakoids.
  Thylakoids contain complexes called photosystems which are made up of photosynthetic
  pigments. Thylakoids stacked to form a granum. The grana are interconnected by inter
  granal lamellae. The ﬂuid outside the thylakoid is stroma which contain circular DNA
  (chloroplast DNA), 70s ribosomes, many enzymes, starch granules and lipid droplets.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                     Resource Book




                    Fig 2.24: Structure of the chloroplast



Functions
  • Photosynthesis


Cytoskeleton
  Cytoskeleton is the supporting structure of the cell and maintains its shape. It is
  more important for animal cells which lack cell walls. Cytoskeleton is made out of
  microtubules and protein ﬁlaments. Additionally, it is Dynamic hence, has the ability
  to break and reform as needed.
   There are three types of components in the Cytoskeleton as follows;
   • Microtubules
   • Actin ﬁlaments or Microﬁlaments,
   • Intermediate ﬁlaments
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Table 2.5: Differences between Microtubules, Microﬁlaments and intermediate ﬁlaments
     Property              Microtubules      Microﬁlaments         Intermediate ﬁlaments
                           (Tubulin          (Actin ﬁlaments)
                           polymers)

     Structure         Hollow      tubes;    Two intertwined       Fibrous         proteins
                       wall consists of      strands of actin,     supercoiled into thicker
                       13 columns of         each strand is a      cables
                       tubulin molecules     polymer of actin
                                             subunitrs
     Protein subunits Tubulin                Actin                 One of several different
                                                                   proteins (e.g. Keratin),
                                                                   depending on the cell
                                                                   type.

     Main functions Maintenance of       Maintenance of            Maintaining of cell
                    cell shape Cell      cell shape (tension-      shape (tension-bearing
                    motility (as in      bearing elements)         elements)
                    cilia or ﬂagella)    Changes in cell           Anchorage of nucleus
                       Chromosome        shape Muscle              and certain other
                       movements in cell contraction               organelles.Formation
                       division          Cytoplasmic               of nuclear lamina
                       Organelle         streamingin
                       movements         plant cells Cell
                                         motility (as in
                                         pseudopodia)
                                             Cell division
                                             in animal cells
                                             (cleavage furrow
                                             formation)
Functions
     • Provide strength to the cytoplasm
       • Anchorage organelles and cytosolic enzymes of the cell
       • Movement of cytoplasm, cytoplasmic streaming, positioned organelles and
         move chromosomes when necessary.
       • Maintain the shape of the cell (mainly in animal cells)
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
Cilia and Flagella
   Cilia and ﬂagella share a common structure. Flagella are long elongated structures
   and Cilia are short cellular projections that are often organized in rows. Cilia are more
   numerous than ﬂagella on the cell surface. They are made of microtubules, with a
   9+2 structure (Nine doublets of microtubules are arranged in a ring, with two single
   microtubules in its center). They are covered by plasma membrane and bound to a
   basal body which anchors the cilium or ﬂagellum to the cell. The Basal body has 9 + 0
   arrangement (no microtubules in its center)


Functions
  • Act as locomotor appendages
   • Can move ﬂuid over the surface of the tissue
   • Cilia lining in oviducts help move an egg toward the uterus




                                  Fig 2.25: Structure of the Cilium
Centrioles
  Centriole is made up of cylindrically arranged microtubules which are non membrane
  bounded subcellular component present only in animal cells. Each centriole composed
  of nine sets of triplet microtubules arranged in a ring (9+0). A pair of centrioles which
  arranged perpendicular to each other are located in a region called centrosome near the
  nucleus.


Functions
  • Produce aster and spindle in cell division
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Central Vacuole
  Central vacuole is a large structure, bound by tonoplast, ﬁlled with liquid called cell
  sap found in plant cells. The composition of sap differs from cytosol and it contains
  water, ions such as Potassium and Chloride and sometimes water soluble colored
  pigments such as anthocyanin.


Functions
  • Stores water and other materials such as sugars, ions and pigments.
    • Maintains water balance of the cell
    • Gives turgidity and support to cell.
    • Produce colours in some plants with sap pigments
    • Stores soluble substances needed for cellular activities.


Extracellular components

1. Cell wall
   Cell wall is an extracellular structure of plant cells. Animal cells do not have cell walls.
   However, prokaryotes, fungi and some protists also have a thin and ﬂexible cell wall
   .The chemical composition of the wall greatly varies from species to species and even
   from one cell type to another even in the same plant. Nevertheless in Plants, cell wall
   is generally made up of cellulose, pectin, hemicellulose, lignin and suberin (in some
   plant cells only).


    Plants generate two types of cell walls: primary and secondary walls. Young cells ﬁrst
    secrete primary cell wall: it is the wall laid down during plant cell division.
    Just outside the primary wall there is a thin layer (middle lamella) which is rich in
    sticky polysaccharides called pectins (magnesium and calcium pectate).Middle lamella
    glues adjacent cells together. Due to the deposition of hardening substances on the
    primary wall a secondary cell wall is generated secondarily.
    Primary cell wall is permeable, relatively thin, ﬂexible, composed mainly of cellulose
    ﬁbers which are laid unevenly running through the extracellular matrix (middle
    lamella)Water can move freely through the free spaces of cell wall


    Secondary cell wall lies between plasma membrane and primary cell wall. It contains
    several layers of hard materials, forming a rigid structure. In addition to cellulose,
    impermeable substances such as lignin and suberine are also incorporated in to the
    secondary wall. Lignin cement anchors cellulose ﬁbers together providing hard and
    rigid matrix, giving the cell wall an extra support.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                     Resource Book
   Cell wall has pits through which cytoplasm of adjoining cells join through
   plasmodesmata.


Functions
  • Protection and support
   • Allows development of turgidity when water enters the cell
   • Prevents bursting during turgidity
   • Limits and control cell growth
   • Component of appoplast pathway
   • Maintaining cell shape
   • hold the plant up against the force of gravity


2. Cell junctions
   Cell junctions are structures at which neighbouring plasma membranes are joined.
   They are also interact and communicate via sites of direct physical contacts.


Functions
     • Connects the internal chemical environment of adjacent cells.
      • Cell junctions are structures at which cytoplasm of adjoining cells are joined.
        There are three types of cell junctions in animal cells
      • Tight junctions – connect the plasma membranes of adjacent cells tightly bound
        by speciﬁc proteins forming continous seals around the cells. Prevent leakages
        of extracellular ﬂuids through intercellular space. e.g. skin epithelium
      • Desmosomes/Anchor junctions – mechanically attach the cytoskeletons of
        adjoining cells by intermediate ﬁlaments for strong binding.e.g. muscle tissue
      • Gap junctions /Communicating junctions – provide cytoplasmic channels
        from one cell to an adjescent cell. Gap junctions consists of special membrane
        proteins that surround the pore through which ions, sugars amino acids may
        pass. They allow signal and material exchange between adjacent cells through
        direct connections. e.g.heart muscles, animal embryo.


Plasmodesmata
     • Microscopic channels which runs through plant cell walls. They are cytoplasmic
       living connections between cytoplasm of adjoining cells. These are membrane
       lined channels ﬁlled with cytoplasm.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Extracellular matrix of animal cells
  Although animal cells lack cell walls they do have elaborate extracellular matrix
  (ECM). Main components of the ECM are glycoproteins and other carbohydrates
  containing molecules secreted by the cells. Most abundant glycoprotein in the ECM of
  most animal cell is collagen which forms strong ﬁbres outside the cell. The collagen
  ﬁbres are embedded in a network woven out of proteoglycan secreted by cells.
    Functions
    • Forms a protective layer over the cell surface
    • Linking extra cellular matrix and cytoskeleton.
    • Inﬂuences the cell behavior by Involving in the mechanical and chemical
      signaling.


The cell cycle and the process of cell division

    The sequence of events that takes place in the cell from the end of one cell division
    to the end of the next cell division is referred to as cell cycle. At the end of the cell
    division, two genetically identical daughter cells resembling the parent cell are
    produced in mitosis.




                Fig 2.26: The cell cycle
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

                                  Eukaryotic cell cycle
Mitosis
  Eukaryotic cell cycle may divided into two major phases.
   • Interphase
   • Mitotic phase/ M-phase
   Interphase is the longer phase of cell division. It covers about 90% of the cell cycle.
   Interphase could be divided into three phases;
   • G1 phase (ﬁrst gap phase)
   • S phase (synthetic phase)
   • G2 phase (second gap phase)


   G1 phase
   In this phase synthesis of proteins and production of cellular organelles leading to cell
   growth occur. Proteins essential for S phase are produced during this phase.
   S phase
   DNA replication occurs and synthesis of histone proteins takes place. DNA wind
   around histone beads and form chromatin.
   G2 phase
   Cells continue to grow through protein synthesis as well as cellular organelles. Proteins
   essential for mitotic phase will be synthesized. Duplication of centrosomes takes place.
   There are cell cycle-controlling checkpoints available at G1, G2 and M phases to ensure
   that the cell is ready for moving into upcoming phases of cell division. Some cells
   receive a go-head signal at the G1 check point, it will usually complete the G1, S, G2
   and M phases and divide. If it does not receive a go head signal at that point it may exit
   the cycle, entering into a non dividing stage called the Go phase. The most cells of the
   human body are actually in the Go phase. e.g. nerve cells and muscle cells.


   Mitotic phase/ M phase
   M phase covers only about 10% of cell cycle. This includes mitosis and cytokinesis.


Mitosis
  Mitosis is referred to the nuclear division which gives rise to two genetically identical
  daughter nuclei from a mother nucleus. This may get divided into ﬁve stages; prophase,
  prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase in order to ease the learning of
  activities of cell cycle.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    1. Prophase
    Chromatin ﬁbers get condensed by shortening and thickening and transformed into
    chromosomes. As a result chromosomes will be visible through light microscope.
    Nucleoli get disappeared and chromosomes appear with two sister chromatids attached
    at the centromere. Chromosomal arms of sister chromatids attached by special proteins
    called cohesion. The formation of mitotic spindles begins. Spindle includes the
    centrosomes, the spindle microtubules and the aster.
    Centrosomes move toward opposite poles of the cell due to the lengthening of
    microtubules between them.


    2. Prometaphase
    The nuclear envelope fragments. Chromosomes get even more condensed. A special
    protein called kinetochore attaches the sister chromatids of each chromosome at their
    centromere. Some of the microtubules that attach to the kinetochore of the chromosomes
    move the chromosomes back and forth. Microtubules which are not attached to the
    kinetochore interact with those from the opposite poles.


    3. Metaphase
    Centrosomes reach the opposite poles. The chromosomes have arrived to a place called
    metaphase plate which is located in equal distance from each pole. The centromeres
    of all chromosomes are located in the metaphase plate. At the end of this phase, each
    chromosome of the cell get attached to the kinetochore microtubule at their centromere
    and aligned at the metaphase plate.


    4. Anaphase
    Sister chromatids are separated at the centromere. Microtubules attached to kinetochore
    get shorten and pull sister chromatids towards the opposite poles. Cell elongates as
    the non kinetochore microtubules are lengthen. By the end of anaphase equal and
    complete set of chromosomes found at each pole of the cell.


    5. Telophase
    Nuclear envelope reforms around each set of chromosomes at opposite poles. Nucleoli
    reappears. Spindle microtubules get deplolymerized. Chromosomes unwind and
    become less condense to form chromatin. Two genetically identical daughter nuclei
    are formed.
Cytokinesis
  The division of the cytoplasam starts at the end of the telophase. Therefore at the end
  of the mitosis two genetically identical daughter cells are produced.
    In animal cells- a cleavage furrow forms. This produces two genetically identical
    daughter cells.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   In plant cells- cell plate forms as a result of vesicle produced by golgi apparatus. This
   divides the cytoplasm in to two and generates two genetically identical daughter cells
   to the parent cell.


   Signiﬁcances of mitosis
   1. Maintains the genetic stability
   2. Growth and development
   3. Cell repair, replacement and regeneration
   4. Asexual reproduction
             G2 of interphase                Prophase                    Prometaphase




             Metaphase                          Anaphase                  Telophase and
                                                                           cytokinesis


                  Fig 2.27 : The phases of mitotic cell cycle
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

                                          Meiosis

    Sexually reproducing organisms undergo different type of cell division called meiosis.
    Meiosis
    Meiosis is a type of nuclear division which gives rise to four haploid, genetically non
    identical daughter nuclei, from a diploid mother nucleus.
    Meiosis involves two consecutive nuclear divisions, Meiosis I and Meiosis II.


    Meiosis I is a reduction division and Meiosis II is similar to mitosis, each stage consists
    of four sub-phases: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.
    Before meiosis one cell is in interphase, during S phase of the interphase DNA
    replication occur.


Meiosis I

    1. Prophase I
    Cell enters to the prophase from interphase.Chromosomes begin to condense.
    Nucleolus begins to disappear. Next the formation of zipper like structure called the
    synaptonemal complex by a speciﬁc proteins holds two homolg tightly together. The
    pairing and physical connection of homologous chromosomes is called synapsis.
    During synapsis part of the DNA molecule of non-sister chromatids paired homologous
    chromosomes break, exchange and rejoin at corresponding point. This process is called
    crossing over. These points of crossing over become visible as chiasmata after the
    synaptonemal complex dissembles and the homologous chromosomes slightly apart
    from each other
    Nuclear envelop breaks. Centrosomes move towards opposite poles forming spindle
    in animal cells.
    The kinetochore of each homologue attach to microtubule from one pole or the other.
    The homologous pair then moves toward the metaphase plate.


    2. Metaphase I
    The pair of homologous chromosomes get arranged on the metaphase plate with one
    chromosome of each pair faces each pole. Both chromatids of a homologue are attached
    to kinetochore microtubules from one pole and those of the other homolog are attached
    to kinetochore microtubules from the opposite pole. Homologous chromosome arrange
    randomly at metaphase plate.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book
   3. Anaphase I
   Kinetochore microtubules of the spindle get shorten. Homologous pair separates and
   one chromosome of each pair moves towards the opposite pole. Sister chromatids of
   each chromosome remain attached at the centromere and move as a single unit towards
   the same pole.


   4. Telophase I
   One complete haploid set of chromosomes accumulate at each pole. Nuclear envelope
   reforms around each set of chromosomes.Nucleoli reappear. Spindle disintegrates.
   Chromosomes decondensed into chromatin.Genetically non identical, haploid, two
   daughter nuclei are formed within one cell.


   Cytokinesis
   Usually occurs simultaneously with telophase I. Genetically non identical, haploid,
   two daughter cells are formed. In animal cells, cleavage furrow is formed. In plant
   cells a cell plate is formed.
   No DNA replication occurs between meiosis I and meiosis II


   Meiosis II
   1. Prophase II
   Centrosomes start producing spindle apparatus (spindle ﬁbers, aster centrosome).
   Chromatin ﬁbers condense and produce chromosomes with two sister chromatids.
   Nuclear envelope breaks down into fragments. Nucleolus disappears. During the late
   prophase II centromere of the chromosomes are moved to the metaphase II plate.


   2. Metaphase II
   All Chromosomes get attached to the microtubules at their centromere and aligned on
   the metaphase plate. Kinetochores of sister chromatids are attached to microtubules
   extending from both poles.
   Due to the crossing over in meiosis I, the two sister chromatids of each chromosome
   are not genetically identical.
   Meiosis II usually takes place in the perpendicular direction of Meiosis I. Therefore,
   metaphase plate of meiosis II is perpendicular to the metaphase plate of meiosis I.


   3. Anaphase II
   Due to the breakdown of proteins attaching sister chromatids, they are separated
   at centromere. As a result of shortening of microtubules , sister chromatids of each
   chromosome move towards opposite poles.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    4. Telophase II
    Nuclear envelope and nucleolus reform. Chromosomes decondense into chromatin.
    Spindle disassembles. Genetically non identical,haploid, four daughter nuclei are
    formed from one parent cell.


    Cytokinesis
    Cytokinesis occurs as in mitosis. Genetically non identical, haploid, four daughter
    cells are formed. These four daughter cells are not even identical to their parent cell.
    Centrosomes or centrioles are not available in plant cells. However, spindle is formed
    during cell division from accumulated microtubule complex.




            Meiosis I                                   Meiosis I
            Prophase I                                 Metaphase I
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                  Resource Book




              Meiosis I                Meiosis I
              Anaphase I                Telophase I
                                      and cytokinesis




                  Meiosis II      Meiosis II
                  Prophase II     Metaphase II
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                Meiosis II                                Meiosis II
                Anaphase II                              Telophase II
                                                        and cytokinesis

                Fig 2.28: The phases of meiosis


Signiﬁcance of meiosis
     • Maintains the constant number of chromosomes through generations in sexually
        reproducing species.
       • Producse new genetic variations leading to evolution.
       • Genetic variation occurs due to crossing over ,recombination and independent
         assortment.


Tumor, cancer and galls
    • Cell division is driven by external and internal factors. They may be chemical or
        physical factors
       • Cancer cells do not respond to normally to the body’s control mechanism
       • They divide excessively and invade other tissues. If unchecked they can kill the
         organism.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book
      • Cancer cells do not consider the normal signals that regulate the cell cycle.
      • They do not need growth factors. They may make required growth factors
        themselves or giving signals to continue cell cycle without growth factors.
        Another possibly is an abnormal cell cycle control system.
      • The problem begins when a single cell in a tissue undergoes transformation, the
        process converts a normal cell to abnormal cell.
      • If the body immune system can not recognize and destroy it, it may leads to
        proliferation of cells and formation of a tumor.
      • If the abnormal cells remain at the original site, the lump is called benign tumor.
        Most benign tumors do not cause serious problems and can be completely
        removed by a surgery.
      • A malignant tumor becomes invasive and attack one or more organs. An
        individual with a malignant tumor is said to have a cancer.
      • A few tumor cells may separate from the original tumor, enter blood vessels or
        lymph vessels and travel to other parts of the body. They may proliferate and
        form a new tumor.
      • This spread of cancer cells to locations distant from their original site is called
        metastasis.


   Galls in plants
     • This occurs due to uncontrolled mitotic division of plant cell.
      • The plant cell division is controlled by maintaining a proper balance between
        plant growth regulators such as auxins and cytokinins. When this balance is lost
        plant cells produce undifferentiated mass of cells.
      • Galls are the bumbs and growths that develop on different parts of plants after
        being invaded by some very unique organisms.
      • Galls have range of causes, including viruses, fungi, bacteria, insects and mites.
      • Usually the gall causers in some way attack or penetrate the plants growing
        tissues and causes the host to reorganize its cells and to develop an abnormal
        growth.
The energy relationships in metabolic processes

   Sum of all biochemical reactions of living being is known as the metabolism and it
   consists of all catabolic and anabolic reactions.
   Catabolism is breaking down of complex molecules into simple molecules by
   releasing free energy. Therefore it is an exergonic reaction. Anabolism is making
   complex molecules from the simple molecules by absorbing free energy. Hence it is
   an endergonic reaction.
   Biochemical reactions involved in usage of energy released by catabolic reactions in
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    living system are called as anabolic reactions. ATP acts as the energy carrier in all
    living organism including the simplest bacteria. Therefore the ATP is known as the
    universal currency of energy transactions.
    Energy can be deﬁned as the capacity to do work. All living organisms require energy
    for their living process in many ways. Such processes are;
    • Synthesis of substances
    • Active transport across plasma membrane
    • Transmission of nerve impulses
    • Muscle contraction
    • Beating of cilia and ﬂagella
    • Bioluminescence
    • Electrical discharges.
    Overall idea of the energy relations of living system on biosphere is composed of
    following steps.
       • Energy ﬂows into biological systems from the environment through solar
         radiation. (Primary energy source is the Sun)
       • Light energy is captured in the cells having photosynthetic pigments (chlorophyll)
         by the process of photosynthesis and stored as chemical energy in the organic
         compounds such as carbohydrates
       • Captured energy in organic food is transformed into chemical energy in ATP by
         a process called cellular respiration.
       • The energy stored in ATP is utilized in various energy requiring processes.


    ATP (Adenosine Tri Phosphate)
    ATP is a nucleotide, consisting of,
    • Ribose- sugar
    • Adenine - nitreogenous base
    • A chain of three phosphate groups.


    During the hydrolysis of ATP, ADP and Pi are produced. As a result, a very high energy
    is released. This is because the reactants (ATP and water) contain more energy in
    comparison to products (ADP and Pi). Therefore it yields energy and is an exergonic
    reaction.
    When ATP is hydrolyzed, the free energy yield of each of the two end phosphate
    groups is -30.5kJ/mol.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                              Resource Book




                 Fig 2.29: Chemical structure of ATP molecule (need not be memorized)


   Most biological reactions use the energy released during breaking of the terminal
   phosphate bond. ATP is mobile. Therefore it can carry energy to anywhere in the cell,
   for any energy consuming reaction.
   ATP can be produced within living cells within a short period of time, using ADP,
   inorganic phosphate (Pi) and energy. Production of ATP within cells is called
   phosphorylation. According to the energy source phosphorylation is divided as;
   i. Photophosphorylation               – synthesis of ATP using solar
                                           energy in photosynthesis
   ii. Substrate phosphorylation         – synthesis of ATP using energy
                                            released by the breaking
                                           down of complex molecules
                                           into simple ones.
   iii. Oxidative phosphorylation        – synthesis of ATP using energy
                                           released as a result of
                                          oxidation of molecules.


   In living cells energy in ATP is transformed in to various energy forms which are used
   for different functions.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


                                                                         electricity




The role of Enzymes in regulating metabolic reactions
  An enzyme is a macromolecule, which acts as a biological catalyst. Enzymes are
  produced in living cells/
    General characteristics of an enzyme:
    1. Most of the enzymes are globular proteins.
    2. Enzymes are biological catalysts. They lower the activation energy of the
       reaction they catalyze (increases the rate of reaction).
    3. Most enzymes are heat liable/ sensitive
    4. Their presence does not alter the nature or properties of the end products
    ` of any reaction.
    5. Enzymes are highly speciﬁc to the substrate (substrate speciﬁc)
    6. Most enzyme catalyzed reactions are reversible.
    7. The rate of enzyme activity is affected by pH, temperature and substrate
       concentrations.
    8. They are not being used up during the reaction.
    9. Enzymes possess active sites where the reaction takes place.
    10. Some enzymes need non-proteinous components to catalyse the reaction
        which are known as cofactors.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                           Resource Book




   Fig 2.30 - The relationship between activation energy and the enzyme


The mechanisms of enzyme action

   The reactant and enzyme acts on is referred to as the substrate. The enzyme binds to its
   substrate forming enzyme-substrate complex. While enzyme and substrate form their
   complex, catalytic action of the enzyme converts the substrate to the product.
   Enzyme + substrate             Enzyme-substrate complex         Enzyme + Product
   The reaction catalyzed by each enzyme is very speciﬁc. The speciﬁcity of an enzyme
   results from its shape. The substrate binds to a speciﬁc region of the enzyme. This
   region is called the active site. The active site is formed by only a few amino acids.
   Other amino acids are needed to maintain the shape of the enzyme molecule. The
   shape of the active site is complementary to the shape of the speciﬁc substrate of the
   enzyme, and hence important in the substrate speciﬁcity of the enzyme. The shape
   of the active site of an enzyme is not always fully complementary to its substrate. As
   enzymes are not rigid structures, the interactions between substrate and active site
   may slightly change the shape of the active site, so that the substrate and the active site
   become complementary to each other. This is called induced ﬁt mechanism. The tight
   ﬁt not only brings the substrate molecules and the active site close to each other, but
   also ensures the correct orientation of the molecules to help the reaction to proceed
   and catalyzes the conversion of substrate to product. Thereafter, the product departs
   from the active site of the enzyme. The enzyme is then free to take another substrate
   molecule into its active site.
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                Fig 2.31: Induced ﬁt between an enzyme and its substrate
    Cofactors
    Non-proteinuos components which are essential for the catalytic activities of certain
    enzymes are called cofactors.
    These cofactors bind to the enzymes in two ways. Some tightly bind and remain
    permanently and others loosely bind temporarily. Loosely bound cofactors are
    reversible under certain circumstances.
    Organic cofactors are called co-enzymes. e.g. derivatives of vitamins e.g. NAD, FAD
    and biotin
    Inorganic co-factors – e.g. Zn2+, Fe2+, Cu2+


    Factors affecting the rate of enzymatic reactions
    1. Temperature
    2. pH
    3. Substrate concentration
    4. Enzyme concentration
    5. Inhibitors


Temperature
  Increase in temperature increases molecular motion. Therefore the speed of the
  moving molecules of both enzymes as well as the substrate will be accelerated. This
  will enhance the colliding probability for both enzyme active sites and substrate
  molecules. More collision between the enzyme active sites and substrate molecules
  generate greater chances for the reaction to occur. This can continue up to a certain
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                               Resource Book
   point, after which there is a rapid decline in enzyme activity. This point is referred to
   as optimum temperature. This may vary from organism to organism.
   e.g. most of the human enzymes have optimum temperature around the body temperature
   (35˚C-40˚C). Optimum temperature of bacteria in hot springs is about 70˚C.
   When the temperature increases beyond the optimum temperature, the hydrogen
   bonds, ionic and other weak chemical bonds of enzyme active sites may be disrupted.
   This will result a change in the shape of the active site of enzyme which will alter
   the complementary nature of the active site of enzyme molecules. Therefore, the
   complementary binding of enzyme active sites and substrate molecules will be
   prevented. The above event is called as denaturation of enzyme molecules.


   Therefore the rate of enzyme catalyzed reaction will start to decline when the
   temperature increases beyond the optimum temperature and stops completely at certain
   temperature, although rate of collision will keep on increasing.




                 Fig -2.32   The graph of Rate of reaction (V) vs Temperature(T)
   pH
   Enzymes function most efﬁciently within a certain pH range despite maintaining
   temperature of the environment constant.
   The narrow range of pH in which a particular enzyme catalyzed reaction takes place
   is named as the pH range. The pH at which the highest rate of reaction occurs is the
   optimum pH of the enzyme.The alteration in pH above or below the optimum pH
   may lead to decline in enzyme activity. This is due to the alteration of chemical bonds
   involving in formation of enzyme substrate complex. In most enzymes optimum pH
   range is 6-8, but there are exceptions. Pepsin works best at pH 2 and optimum pH for
   Trypsin is 8.
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                 Fig 2.33- Rates of reaction of two enzymes at various pH values


    Substrate concentration
    Increasing substrate concentration increases the probability of collision between
    the enzyme and substrate molecules with correct orientation. However the enzyme
    molecules will be saturated after a particular concentration and therefore there will not
    be any further increase in the rate of reaction.


    Enzyme inhibitors
    Certain molecules or ions selectively bind permanently or temporarily to the enzyme
    molecules and prevent them from forming enzyme-substrate complex. These substances
    are called inhibitors.
    They are either binding reversibly with weak interactions or binding irreversibly
    through covalent bonds.
    e.g. Irreversible inhibitors: toxins, poisons
       Reversible inhibitors- drugs used against microbes


    Competitive inhibitors
    Most of these are reversible inhibitors. These chemicals resemble the shape and nature
    of the substrate. Therefore they compete with the substrate selectively for the active
    site of certain enzymes. As a result of the above, the number of active sites available for
    the enzymes may decline and therefore reduces the rate of enzyme catalyzed reactions.
    The above situation may be reversed by increasing the substrate concentration.
    e.g. Protease inhibitor of drugs against HIV.-change
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book



              substrate                                                  products
                                   active site
                                                                     enzyme
     enzyme
                                        substrate enzyme
                 Inhibitor              complex

                                    active site
        enzyme

                                      Inhibitor bind to the
                                      enzyme active site


                                  Fig 2.34: Competitive inhibitors


   Non-competitive inhibitors
   These chemicals do not compete with substrate molecules. They interrupt enzymatic
   reaction by binding to a part of the enzyme other than the active site. This causes the
   enzyme molecule to change its shape in such a way that the active site becomes less
   effective for the formation of enzyme substrate complex.




                  Fig 2.35: noncompetitive inhibitors


Regulation mechanism of enzymatic activity in cells
  Allosteric regulation of enzymes
  In many cases, the molecules that naturally regulate enzyme activity in a cell behave
  like reversible non-competitive inhibitors. Regulatory molecules (either activators or
  inhibitors) bind to speciﬁc regulatory sites elsewhere (other than the active site) of
  the molecule via non-covalent interactions and affect the shape and function of the
  enzyme. It may result in either inhibition or stimulation of an enzyme activity.
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    a.) Allosteric activation and inhibition
    Most enzymes regulated by allosteric regulation are made from two or more subunits.
    Each sub unit composed of a polypeptide chain with its own active site. The entire
    complex oscillates between two different shapes one catalyzing active and other
    inactive. In this two forms regulatory molecules bind to a regulatory site called
    allosteric site, often located where subunits join.
    When an activator binds with this regulatory site, stabilizes the shape with functional
    active sites. Whereas the inhibitor binds with the regulatory site, it stabilizes the inactive
    form of enzyme. Subunits of enzyme arranged in a way through which they transmit
    the signals quickly other subunits. Through the interaction of subunits even a single
    activator or inhibitor molecule that bind to one regulatory site will affect the active
    site of all sub units. e.g. ADP function as allosteric activator bind to the enzyme and
    stimulates the production of ATP by catabolism. If the supply of ATP exceed demand
    catabolism shows down as ATP bind to the same enzyme as inhibitor.


    b.) cooperativity
    This is another type of allosteric activation. Binding of one substrate molecule can
    stimulate binding or activity at other active site. Thereby increase the catalytic activity.
    e.g. hemoglobin (not an enzyme) is made up of four subunits each with an O2
    binding site. The binding of a one molecule of O2 to one binding site increases the
    afﬁnity for O2 of the remaining binding site.


    c.) Feedback inhibition
    In feedback inhibition, a metabolic pathway is stopped by the inhibitory binding of
    its end product of a process to an enzyme. Thereby limit the production of more end
    products than required and thus wasting chemical resources.


    Feedback inhibition
    Feedback inhibition is an essential process regulates the end products produced in
    metabolism.
    e.g. ADP function as allosteric activator and stimulates the production of ATP during
    the catabolism.
    In case ATP supply exceeds demand, catabolism slows down as ATP
    molecules function as allosteric inhibitor.
    Energy needed for all living processes is obtained directly from ATP. ATP is mainly
    produced by a process call ed cellular respiration, in living cells.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book
Photosynthesis as an energy ﬁxing mechanism

    Photosynthesis
   Photosynthesis is a metabolic process by which light energy is trapped and converted
   to chemical energy. Chemical energy is stored in chemical bonds of carbohydrates,
   fats, oils, and proteins. All life on Earth depends on photosynthesis either directly or
   indirectly. Photosynthesis also occurs in algae and certain prokaryotes.
   Global importance of photosynthesis;
   • All life on earth depends on photosynthesis, directly or indirectly
   • Fulﬁll both carbon and energy requirements of organisms
   • Provide O2 for respiration of aerobic organisms
   • Maintain O2 and CO2 balance in the atmosphere
   • Production of fossil fuel
   • Maintenance of global temperature
   During photosynthesis CO2is reduced by the H of H2O and simple sugars are made
   using light energy. In eukaryotic photosynthetic cells, chloroplasts are the sites of
   photosynthesis.
   Process of photosynthesis consists of two main stages and they are integrated.
      • Light-dependent reaction
      • Calvin cycle
   There are two types of photosynthetic mechanisms (path ways) based on the number
   of C atoms of the ﬁrst stable product of the CO2 ﬁxation.
      • C3 Mechanism – No of C atom of the ﬁrst stable compound is three
      • C4 Mechanism – No of C atom of the ﬁrst stable compound is four
   Light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis take place in the membrane system
   of thylakoids. They are ﬂattened ﬂuid-ﬁlled sacs, which form stacks called grana
   at intervals. Chlorophylls, carotenoids and electron acceptors are located on this
   membrane system of thylakoids.
   Stroma is a gel like structure containing soluble enzymes and other chemicals, which
   is the site of the Calvin cycle.
   Photosynthetic pigments are substances which absorb visible light. In a leaf we see
   green colour because chlorophylls absorb violet, blue and red light and therefore, they
   transmit and reﬂect green colour. Different pigments absorb different wavelengths of
   light. In chloroplast, there are two types of chloroplast pigments such as chlorophylls
   and carotenoids. Chlorophyll a is the key light capturing pigment and they participate
   directly in the light reaction of photosynthesis.
   According to the action spectrum, chlorophyll a is more effective for blue and red
   light. Chlorophyll b and caraotenoids (carotenes and xanthophylls) are effective in
   absorption of speciﬁc range wavelengths of corresponding to different colours.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Other important function of some carotenoids is photoprotection. Photoprotection is
    absorption and dissipation of excessive light energy, if not that excessive light may
    cause damage to the chlorophylls or interact with oxygen and form reactive oxidative
    molecules which are dangerous to the cell.


    Absorption spectrum
    An absorption spectrum is a graph of the relative amounts of light absorbed at different
    wavelengths by a pigment.




                               Fig. 2.36: Absorption spectrum
Action spectrum
  An action spectrum is a graph showing the effectiveness of different wave lengths of
  light in stimulating the photosynthesis.




                Fig 2.37: Action spectrum


    Excitation of chlorophyll by light
    When a molecule of chlorophyll or other photosynthetic pigment absorbs light it
    becomes excited. The energy from the light is used to boost electrons to a higher
    level and become positively charged. The excited state is unstable and returns to their
    original lower energy state. The excited electrons may pass through several electron
    carriers until they reach the ﬁnal electron acceptor.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

                    Light energy
   Chlorophyll                           Chlorophyll+ + e- (electron)
   Therefore chlorophyll is oxidized and electron acceptor is reduced.


   Photosystems
   Chlorophyll molecules, other organic molecules and proteins are organized into
   complexes in the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts. They are called photosystems.
   A photosystem contains a reaction centre complex and light harvesting complexes.
   The reaction centre complex also contains a primary electron acceptor.
   There are two types of photosystems found in the thylakoid membrane. They are
   Photosystem I (PS I) and photosystem II (PS II).In the PS I the chlorophyll a molecule
   is known as P700 since they absorb light at 700nm wave length effectively. In the PS
   II the reaction centre contains a chlorophyll a molecule which is known as P680 which
   absorbs light having a wavelength of 680 nm.


   Light-dependent reaction /Light reaction photosynthesis

   Linear electron ﬂow
   Light is absorbed by the photosynthetic pigments and synthesize ATP and NADPH
   due to the excitation of Photosystem I and Photosystem II which are embedded in
   the thylakoid membrane of chloroplast. The key to this energy transformation is a
   ﬂow of the electron in one direction through the photosystems and other molecular
   components built in the thylakoid. This process is called linear electron ﬂow.
   The striking of photons of light on the pigments results in the excitation of electrons
   from the photosystem II to the higher energy state.
   These electrons will be accepted by the primary electron acceptor of photosystem II.
   Splitting of water takes place as a result of an enzyme catalyzed reaction and yields O2
   (g), H+ ions and electrons.


   Electrons released as a result of hydrolysis may neutralize excited photosystem II
   (P680).
   Striking of photons of light on the pigments results in the excitation of electrons from
   photosystem I (P700) to the higher energy state. Excited electrons will be accepted by
   a primary electron acceptor of PSI.
   Excited electrons of PS II at primary electron acceptor of PS II will pass through an
   electron transport chain to PS I and neutralize the excited PS I. The energy released
   due to the passage of electrons from higher energy state to lower energy result in the
   synthesis of ATP. This is known as photophosphorylation. Excited electrons of PS I
   at primary electron acceptor of PSI will pass through an electron transport chain and
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    reduce NADP and yield NADPH. The reduction of NADP is catalyzed by an enzyme
    called NADP reductase.


    Cyclic electron ﬂow
    This occurs in photosystem I but not in Photosystem II. Here some photoexcited
    electrons uses alternative cyclic pathway. This produces ATP but not NADPH and
    Oxygen are released.




                Fig 2.39 : Linear electron ﬂow in the light reaction of photosynthesis


    The Calvin cycle
    The Calvin cycle takes place in the stroma of the chloroplast. Energy from ATP and
    NADPH produced by the light reaction are used to reduce CO2. The reactions are
    catalyzed by enzymes and their sequence was discovered by scientist Calvin. This is
    an anabolic reaction. The ﬁrst stable product of the Calvin cycle is glyceraldehyde
    3-phosphate (G3P). For the net synthesis of one molecule of G3P, the cycle must take
    place three times.
    The Calvin cycle of photosynthesis can be described in three steps;
       Carboxylation (Carbon ﬁxation)
       Reduction
       Regeneration of carbondioxide acceptor


    Carbon ﬁxation
    The CO2 acceptor is a 5 C sugar, Ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). The addition of
    CO2 to a RuBP is called carboxylation. The enzyme involves in this reaction is RuBP
    carboxylase oxygenase or Rubisco.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                           Resource Book

   The ﬁrst product of RuBP carboxylation is a 6C molecule which is unstable and breaks
   down immediately in to two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA). This is the ﬁrst
   stable product of photosynthesis. The enzyme RuBP carboxylase oxygenase (Rubisco)
   is present in large amounts in the chloroplast stroma.


   Reduction phase
   1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate will be reduced to Glyceraldehyde 3- phosphate (G3P)
   through step by step. Enzyme catalyzed reactions utilizing NADPH and ATP from
   light reaction. G3P will act as a precursor for carbohydrate synthesis (glucose).


   Regeneration of RuBP
   RuBP is regenerated by undergoing a series of complex reactions. This process uses
   energy from ATP generated in light reaction.


Photorespiration
  As its name suggests, Rubisco is capable of catalyzing two distinct reactions, acting as
  both a carboxylase and as an oxygenase.
   In the oxygenase reaction of Rubisco uses the same substrate, RUBP, but reacts it with
   O2. The reaction is catalyzed on the same active site as the carboxylation reaction.
   Thus CO2 and O2 are competitive substrates. Therefore CO2 inhibits the oxygenase and
   O2 Inhibits the carboxylase reaction.
   The oxygenase reaction forms just one molecule of 3-PGA plus a two carbon product,
   2-phosphoglycolate which is of no immediate use in the Calvin cycle and in higher
   concentrations it is toxic for the plant. It therefore has to be processed in a metabolic
   pathway called photorespiration. The photorespiratory pathway involves enzymes in
   the chloroplasts, peroxisome and mitochondria. (detail of this pathway is not expected).


   Photorespiration is not only energy demanding, but furthermore leads to a net loss
   of CO2 Each time Rubisco reacts with O2 instead of CO2 the plants makes 50% less
   3-PGA than it would have done if CO2 had been used. This potentially eliminates the
   net gain in photosynthetic carbon and loose the productivity.


   These two factors result in an increase in photorespiration relative to photosynthesis
   so that an increasing proportion of carbon is lost as the temperature rises.
   The CO2. required for photosynthesis enters a leaf via stomata. However, stomata
   are also the main avenues of transpiration. On a hot, dry day, most plants close their
   stomata in order to conserves water. At the same time O2. released from the light
   reactions begins to increase and this leads to further reduction of (CO2.) to (O2) ratio in
   the cytosol. These conditions within the leaf favor a wasteful process photorespiration
   under high temperature, dryness and high light intensities.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Therefore plants developed different way to cope with this situation during the
    evolution that resulted a most successful solution to concentrate CO2 around Rubisco
    provided by C4 photosynthetic pathway.


    The establishment of C4 photosynthetic pathway includes several biochemical and
    anatomical modiﬁcations that allow plants with this pathway to concentrate CO2 at the
    site of Rubisco. Thereby its oxygenase reaction and the following photorespiration are
    largely repressed in C4 plants.


    In most C4 plants the CO2 concentration mechanism is achieved by a division of labor
    between two distinct specialized leaf cell types, the mesophyll and the bundle sheath
    cells. Compared to C3 plants the bundle sheath cells of C4 plants have expanded
    physiological functions. This is reﬂected by the enlargement and higher organelle
    content of these cells in C4 species. For the efﬁcient function of the C4 pathway a
    close contact between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells are tightly interconnected to
    each other by high numbers of plasmodesmata. The bundle sheath cells enclose the
    vascular bundles and are themselves surrounded by the mesophyll cells and this type
    of leaf anatomy was termed Kranz anatomy.


    Since Rubisco can operate under high CO2 concentrations in the bundle sheath cells, it
    works more efﬁciently than in C3 plants. Because of the CO2 concentration mechanism
    they can acquire enough CO2 even when keeping their stomata more closed and
    minimize the water loss by transpiration.


    C4 pathway of photosynthesis
    In the mesophyll cells of C4 plants CO2 is converted to bicarbonate by carbonic
    anhydrase and initially ﬁxed by phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase using PEP as CO2
    acceptor. The resulting oxaloacetate (OAA) is composed of four carbon atoms, which
    is the basis for the name of this metabolic pathway. Oxaloacetate is rapidly converted
    to the more stable C4 acids malate or aspertate that diffuse to the bundle sheath cells.
    Here, CO2 is released by decarboxylating enzymes and the released CO2 is reﬁxed by
    Rubisco, which exclusively operates in the bundle sheath cells in C4 plants.
    Chloroplasts found in mesophyll cells are different in anatomy in comparison to
    chloroplasts of bundle sheath cells.


    Since chloroplasts of mesophyll cells carryout only light reaction, they are rich in
    grana. The grana of mesophyll chloroplasts are large and highly differentiated for light
    reaction. Bundle sheath chloroplasts possess a very few, less differentiated grana or
    grana are absent. Moreover, that PSII in the bundle sheath cells are depleted in order
    to lower oxygen production in these cells.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book


      CO2 + H2O       carbonic anhydrase     HCO3- + H+


      PEP + HCO3- PEP carboxylase            Oxaloacetate (4C)


   This PEP carboxylase enzyme is much more efﬁcient than the enzyme of RUBP
   carboxylase for two reasons.
   1. It reacts with bicarbonate (HCO-3) rather than with CO2’ The advantage
   of this is that there is a 50-fold higher concentration of HCO3- than CO2
   in solution in the cytosol.
   2. It has no afﬁnity for O2




                 Fig 2.39 : The C4 Pathway


Signiﬁcance of the C4 pathway
     • Helps plants to improve the efﬁciency of CO2 ﬁxation at lower CO2 concentrations
        by preventing the gateways for photorespiration by spatially separating Rubisco.
      • In hot-dry climate, it is essential for the stomata to close to prevent water loss
        through transpiration. This reduces CO2 intake of particular plants. Therefore,
        plants in tropical zones or hot climate may suffer from CO2 deﬁciency. At lower
        CO2 concentrations, C4 mechanism increases the efﬁciency of photosynthesis
        by concentrating CO2 in the bundle sheath cells.
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology



    C4 plants exhibit better water-use efﬁciency than C3 plants because of the CO2
    concentration mechanism they can acquire enough CO2 even when keeping their
    stomata more closed. Thus water loss by transpiration is reduced.
    Since Rubisco can operate under high CO2 concentrations in the bundle sheath cells,
    it woks more efﬁciently than in C3 plants, consequently C4 plants need less of this
    enzyme, this leads to a better nitrogen-use efﬁciency of C4 compared to C3 plants.


    Table 2.6: Comparisons of C3 and C4 plants
        Characteristics     C3 plants                        C4 plants
     Representative        Wheat, rice barley               Maize, sugarcane, grasses
     species
     Temperature optimum 15-25                             50% greater at 35 ˚C
     for    photosynthesis
      0
     ( C)
     CO2 ﬁxation           Occurs once                     Occurs twice, ﬁrst in mesophyll
                                                           cells, second in bundle sheath
                                                           cells
     CO2 acceptor                5C, RuBP                    3C, PEP mesophyll cells
                                                             5C RuBP in bundle sheath
                                                             cells
     CO2 ﬁxing enzyme            Rubisco                     PEP carboxylase in
                                                             mesophyll cells which is very
                                                             efﬁcient
                                                             Rubisco in bundle sheath
                                                             cells, working efﬁciently
                                                             under high CO2 concentration
     First product of CO2 C3 acid,                           4C acid, oxaloacetate (OAA)
     ﬁxation              3- phosphoglycerate
                          (3-PGA)

     Leaf anatomy             Bundle sheath cells, if      Kranz anatomy with
                              present, are not green       photosynthesis occurring in
                              (non photosynthetic),        both mesophyll cells and bundle
                              photosynthesis occurs        sheath cells
                              in Mesophyll cells

        Productivity             Yield is        usually     Yield is usually high
                                 lower
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                  Resource Book
   Factors affecting photosynthesis
   The rate of photosynthesis is an important factor in crop production. Rate is affected
   by various factors.
      e.g. light intensity, CO2 concentration, temperature, water, pollutants and
           inhibitors
   The photosynthesis involves a series of reactions. Therefore various factors are
   involved in it.
   Blackman who is the scientist ﬁrst proposed the idea of principal of limiting factors.
   When a chemical process is affected by more than one factor, its rate is limited by the
   factor which is nearest its minimum value.
      e.g. Light intensity


Light Intensity
  The rate of photosynthesis increases linearly with increasing light intensity. Gradually
  the rate of increase falls off as the other factors become limiting. Very high light
  intensities chlorophyll may bleach and slow down photosynthesis. However, plants
  exposed to such conditions are usually protected by devices such as thick cuticles,
  hairy leaves.




                 Fig 2.40: Rate of photosynthesis with light intensity at different temperatures


   Under normal conditions, CO2 is the major limiting factor in photosynthesis. Increase
   in photosynthetic rate is achieved by increasing CO2 concentration. For example some
   greenhouse crops such as tomatoes are grown in CO2 enriched atmosphere.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Cellular respiration as a process of obtaining energy

    Cellular respiration is the process by which chemical energy in organic molecules such
    as carbohydrates is released by stepwise oxidative process, catalyzed by enzymes and
    made available in living cells in the form of ATP. Cellular respiration is divided as
    a) aerobic respiration
    b) anaerobic respiration


Aerobic respiration:-
  The process of synthesize ATP from the respiratory substrates such as glucose in the
  presence of molecular oxygen (O2) known as aerobic respiration. Glucose is found to
  be the major respiratory substrate in living cells.
    The aerobic respiration of glucose molecules can be represented by the following
    balanced chemical equation.


    C6H12O6 + 6O2(g)                        6CO2(g) + 6H2O + Energy (ATP+ heat)
    This process consist three main steps. They are;
          a)    Glycolysis
          b)    Pyruvate oxidation and citric acid cycle (Kreb’s cycle)
          c)    oxidative phosphorylation (Electron transport chain)


Glycolysis
  It takes place in the cytosol of the cell, because all enzymes that catalyze reactions of
  the glycolysis are found in the cytosol of the cell. This process does not depend on O2.
    During the above process a six carbon (6C) glucose molecule is broken down step by
    step into two three-carbon (3C) pyruvate molecules.
    Two ATP molecules are used up to initiate the process.
    Four hydrogen molecules and electrons released from glucose breakdown reduce
    two NAD+ and produce two NADH. At the end of glycolysis there will be four ATP
    molecules produced. Since two ATP molecules were used up for the initiative step, the
    net yield will be two ATP molecules.
    Only when O2 is present, the pyruvate molecules will enter the mitochondria and
    further steps will take place.


Oxidation of Pyruvate/ Link reaction
  These two pyruvate molecules enter mitochondrion by active transport through the
  membrane. In the matrix of mitochondria, Pyruvate is converted to acetyl group by
  releasing two CO2 molecules. Then this acetyl group combines with co-enzyme A to
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                            Resource Book
   produce Acetyl co-A. In this reaction two NAD+ is converted to two NADH molecules.
   Therefore this step can be represented as follows.


   2C3H4O3 + 2CoA + 2NAD+                      2 Acetyl Co-A + 2CO2+ 2 NADH
   Oxidation of pyruvate is a linking reaction of glycolysis and citric acid cycle.
   Acetyl Co-A will feed its acetyl group for citric acid cycle.


   Citric acid cycle
   This takes place in the matrix of mitochondria using speciﬁc enzymes. As the ﬁrst
   product of this cyclic pathway is citric acid, it is known as citric acid cycle. The pathway
   was discovered by a German-British scientist Hans Krebs. Hence,it is named as Kreb’s
   cycle. Citric acid contains three carboxylic acid groups. This cycle is also known as
   Tricarboxylic Acid cycle or TCA cycle.In the citric acid cycle 4 C compound oxalo
   acetate combines with 2 C compound acetyl Co -A to form 6 C compound, citric acid.
   Then citric acid undergoes a series of reactions to regenerate oxaloacetate by releasing
   two CO2 molecules by decarboxylation reaction. One ATP molecule is produced by
   substrate level phosphorylation. One FADH2 and three NADH will be generated as a
   result of oxidation reactions. These are the products of a single acetyl group led into
   citric acid cycle and hence these numbers should double when the yield for a glucose
   molecule is considered.




                                                          Fig 2.41: Krebs cycle (mechanism is
                                                          not necessary for the examination)
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Electron transport chain
   This step is taken place across the inner membrane (cristae) of mitochondria. The
   folding of cristae increases surface area for oxidative phosphorylation. NADH and
   FADH2 products in the early stages of aerobic respiration are oxidized by transferring
   electrons, through the electron transport chain and ﬁnally to molecular oxygen (O2).
   The electron transport chain is located in the inner membrane of mitochondrion and
   composed of series of protein and non-protein molecules involving in the movement
   of electrons and protons across cristae. Therefore, the Molecular oxygen(O2)is the
   ﬁnal electron acceptor in aerobic respiration. In the electron transport chain, ATP is
   synthesized by oxidative phosphorylation.
    In this electron transport chain, energy is released progressively from NADH and
    FADH2 and that energy is used to synthesize ATP. When one molecule of NADH is
    oxidized in the electron transport chain, 2.5 molecules of ATP in average are generated
    due to oxidative phosphorylation. When one molecule of FADH2 is oxidized 1.5
    molecules of ATP in average are produced due to oxidative phosphorylation. Total
    number of ATP that is produced in this step is 28.
    This is true in the active cells such as liver cells and cardiac muscle cells but not in
    other cells where two ATP produced in glycolysis is used to transport 2NADH from
    cytosol to mitochondrial matrix. In those cells total number of ATP produced by one
    molecule of glucose is (32-2) = 30 ATP.
    Total number of ATP molecules produced from one molecule of glucose, during
    aerobic respiration.
    In glycolysis;
            As ATP                     2ATP
            From 2NADH                 5ATP (oxidation phosphorylation)
    In pyruvate oxidation;
            From 2NADH                            5ATP (oxidation)
    In Citric acid cycle;
            As ATP              ATP (substrate level phosphorylation)
            From 6NADH                     15ATP (oxidative phosphyrlation)
            From 2 FADH2                   3ATP
                     Total Number of ATP     = 32 ATP
Anaerobic respiration
  Anaerobic respiration is breaking down of glucose in the absence of molecular oxygen
  which is regulated by enzymes of the cells occurring in cytosol. In the absence of
  molecular oxygen pyruvate molecules cannot be broken down further. ATP generated
  is utilized to fulﬁll energy requirements. However, NADH produced during glycolysis
  cannot be utilized. Therefore, since NAD+is limited it is essential for the cell to
  recycle NADH to enhance the availability of NAD+ other than anaerobic respiration
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

   fermentation is a method of production of ATP in the absence of O2 . There are many
   types of fermentation, differing from end products formed by pyruvate. The two
   common types are;
        1.      Ethyl alcohol fermentation
        2.      Lactic acid fermentation
Ethyl alcohol fermentation
     • Like in aerobic respiration, the ﬁrst step of this is also Glycolysis.
      • Therefore one molecule of glucose is converted to 2 molecules of pyruvate
        giving 2 molecules of ATP and two molecules of NADH
      • Then this pyruvate involve in two steps. In the 1st step pyruvate is converted in
        to Acetyldehyde, releasing a molecule of CO2.
      • In the second step acetyldehyde is reduced to ethanol using NADH that is
        produced in Glycolysis.
      • Therefore ﬁnal hydrogen acceptor in ethyl alcohol fermentation is acetylaldehyde
        (organic compound)
      • Many bacteria carry out ethyl alcohol fermentation. The most common organism
        which carries out ethyl alcohol fermentation is yeast.


Lactic acid fermentation
     • As in ethyl alcohol fermentation, Glycolysis takes place as the ﬁrst step of lactic
        acid fermentation.
      • Therefore one molecule of glucose produces two molecules of pyruvate, two
        molecules of ATP and two molecules of NADH.
      • Then pyruvate is reduced directly by NADH for lactic acid as an end product
        with no release of CO2. Therefore ﬁnal H acceptor is also organic compounds.
      • Certain fungi and bacteria carryout lactic acid fermentation but the most common
        organisms are lactic acid bacteria involved in formation of yoghurt and curd.


     Respiratory quotient
   It is the ratio of CO2 evolved and the volume of O2 consumed in a given time for the
   respiratory substrate.
   RQ= V CO2/ VO2
   RQ of respiration of carbohydrates, fats and proteins are 1.0, 0.7 and 0.8 respectively.
Resource Book                                              G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


                  Use of proteins, Carbohydrates, fats in respiration




                Proteins
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book



   03
          Evolution and Diversity of Organisms


     The theories of origin of life and natural selection to analyze the
                        process of evolution of life

Origin of life on earth

   Condition of earth before life


   E   arth and the other planets of the solar system were formed about 4.6 billion years
       ago. At the beginning of the solar system, planet Earth was being bombarded by
   chunks of rocks and ice.
   The ﬁrst atmosphere was probably thick with water vapour, along with various
   compounds released by volcanic eruptions, including nitrogen and its oxides, carbon
   dioxide, methane, ammonia, hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide. The neutral atmosphere
   then turned to be a reducing one. The ﬁrst atmosphere had little oxygen. Later earth was
   cooled down and the water vapour condensed into the ocean. Some of the hydrogen
   quickly escaped into the space. Volcanic eruptions, lightening, extreme UV radiation,
   hydro thermal vents and alkaline vents along with the Earth’s reducing atmosphere
   favored the synthesis of organic molecules essential for the origin of life. These simple
   organic molecules then polymerized to form macromolecules such as proteins and
   nucleic acids. Further, the formation of self-replicating organic molecules made life
   possible on earth.


Evolution of Biological Diversity
  1. Biochemical evolution
  Direct evidence for life on early earth comes from fossils of micro-organisms that
  are about 3.5 billion years old. Observations and experiments in chemistry, geology
  and physics have provided evidence, for the appearance of the ﬁrst living cells. The
  theory of the biochemical evolution arouse from the hypothesis based on chemical and
  physical processes on early earth. The emerging force of natural selection could have
  produced the ﬁrst cells through a sequence of four main stages.
   1. Atmospheric conditions of early earth facilitated the abiotic synthesis of
   small organic molecules such as amino acids and nitrogenous bases from
   inorganic molecules
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    2. Polymerization of the above small organic molecules leads to the
    formation of organic macromolecules.

                            polymerization
       a. Amino acids                                proteins
       b. N-base + sugar+ phosphate                    Nucleic acids
    3. Organic macromolecules were packed into membranes, to produce
    protocells
    4. Nucleic acids gained self replicating capability, which made inheritance
    possible for the cells.


 2. Origin of protocell
    Haldane suggested that the early oceans were a solution of organic molecules
    “primitive soup” in which life arose. Recent studies related to the volcanic-atmosphere
    and alkaline vents show the abiotic synthesis of organic molecules. Another source
    of organic molecules may have been meteorites. RNA accumulated into lipid bound
    vesicles and formed “protocells” which exhibited enzyme catalyzed activities and were
    able to grow, replicate and evolve. The early genes and enzymes would have been
    RNA which enabled replication of RNA. Other molecules that were in the primitive
    soup were also collected in the protocell. Growth occurred by addition of lipids to the
    membrane by collision of micelles. When the protocell becomes too large, it divided
    to form two protocells with RNA included.


3. Origin of photosynthetic organisms
   Fossils of the ﬁrst photosynthetic organism, today’s cyanobacteria, originated before
   2.7 billion years ago. As a result of photosynthesis iron (Fe 2+) ion were oxidized.
   Once all of the dissolved iron has precipitated, additional O2 dissolved in the water
   until the water bodies became saturated with O2. The increase of photosynthetic
   bacteria contributed to the increment of the amount of atmospheric oxygen which had
   accelerated the origin of chloroplast.


4. The origin of ﬁrst eukaryote
   The fossils of the ﬁrst eukaryotic organisms were estimated as from about 1.8 billion
   years ago. These eukaryotic single cellular organisms later evolved in to multicellular
   organisms. The appearance of structurally complex eukaryotic cells sparked the
   evolution of greater morphological diversity than was possible for the simple
   prokaryotic cells. After the ﬁrst eukaryotes appeared, a great range of unicellular forms
   evolved. It gave rise to diversity of some single-celled eukaryotes which evolved in to
   multicellular forms, such as the varieties of algae, plants, fungi and animals. Fossils
   of the oldest known protists similar to small red algae were dated as 1.2 billion years
   ago.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book
5. Diversiﬁcation of Eukaryotes
   Many present day animal phyla appeared in the early Cambrian period. Several animal
   groups which include, porifera, sponges, cnidarians (Sea anemones and their relatives)
   and molluscs appeared in the late Proterozoic. According to the DNA analysis, sponges
   evolved 700 million years ago. Ancestors of arthropods, chordates and other animal
   phyla originated 670 million years ago. The ﬁrst food chains on earth appeared when
   animals started to depend on algae or plants as consumers and with the arrival of many
   groups of animals, functioning food webs began to appear. Colonization of land by
   fungi, plants and animals began after about 500 million years ago. Plants that colonized
   land possess vascular systems to transport water and minerals and water proof coating
   of wax to prevent the water loss. With the emergence of large trees, differentiation as
   roots, stems and leaves began and diversiﬁed since 40 million years ago. Plants and
   fungi colonized the land together by interacting with each other. Arthropods (insects
   and spiders) were the ﬁrst group of animals to colonize the land. The earliest tetrapods
   formed about 365 million years ago which were evolved from lobed-ﬁnned ﬁsh. The
   divergence of human lineage from other primates was initiated 6-7 million years ago.
   The origin of the human species took place 195,000 years ago.
   Geological eons and eras of evolution
   • Eons: Hadean, Archaean, Proterozoic, Phanerozoic
   • Eras: Eon Phanerozoic covers the 3 eras, Palaeozoic, Mesozoic, Cenozoic
   1. Hadean eon
      • Origin of Earth
   2. Archaean eon
      • Oldest known rocks on Earth’s surface
      • Oldest fossils of cells (prokaryotes) appeared
      • Concentration of atmospheric oxygen begins to increase
   3. Proterozoic eon
       • Diverse algae and soft-bodied invertebrate animals appeared
      • Oldest fossils of eukaryotic cells appeared


Eon Phanerozoic covers the 3 eras; Palaeozoic, Mesozoic, Cenozoic
  1. Palaeozoic era
     • Sudden increase in diversity of many animal phyla
      • Marine algae becomes abundant; colonization of land by diverse fungi, plants,
        and animals
      • Diversiﬁcation of vascular plants
      • Diversiﬁcation of bony ﬁshes, ﬁrst tetrapods and insects appeared
      • Amphibians dominated
      • Extensive forests of vascular plants
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

       • First seed plants appeared
       • Origin and radiation of reptiles
       • Origin of most present-day groups of insects
       • Extinction of many marine and terrestrial organisms
       • Diversiﬁcation of early vascular plants


    2. Mesozoic era
    • Cone-bearing plants (gymnosperms) dominated
    • Dinosaurs evolved, radiated
    • Origin of mammals
    • Gymnosperms continued as dominant plants, dinosaurs dominated,
      abundant and diverse
    • Flowering plants (angiosperms) appeared and diversiﬁed, many
    organisms including dinosaurs become extinct
    3. Cenozoic era
    • Major radiation of mammals, birds, and pollinating insects
    • Dominance of angiosperm increased and their radiation continued,
    radiation of most present day mammalian orders
    • Origins of many primate groups, continued radiation of mammals and
      angiosperms, earliest direct human ancestors
    • Appearance of bipedal human ancestors
    • Origin of genus Homo


Theories of evolution
    Evolution can be deﬁned as a change in the genetic composition of a population from
    generation to generation (descent with modiﬁcation) over a long period of time. This
    may take millions of years.
       Theories of evolution are
       • Theory of Lamarck.
       • Darwin - Wallace theory (Theory of Natural selection)
       • Neo Darwinism


Theory of Lamarck
  Lamarck published his hypothesis in 1809. He explained his hypothesis using two
  principles.
    1. Use and disuse
    2. Inheritance of acquired characteristics
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   1. Use and disuse - The parts of the body that are used extensively become
       larger and stronger. If not used, they deteriorate.
       e.g.- Giraffe stretching its neck to reach leaves on higher branches.
  2.   Inheritance of acquired characteristics – Organism acquired adaptation during
       their life time according to the needs of enviro off spring is better adapted to
       live in that environment e.g. long muscular neck of the giraffe     had evolved
       over many generations as giraffes stretch their necks even higher


Darwin - Wallace theory (Theory of natural selection)
    Darwin observed two phenomena from the environment. His observations were;
       The populations of a species vary in characteristics among their inheritance traits.
       Each species produces more offspring than their environment could accommodate.
       The above observations were interpreted by Charles Darwin as,
       Certain traits of a population which are capable of exhibiting qualities for better
       surviveal and their reproduction can produce more offspring.
       Variation in abilities for survival and production among a population may enhance
       the abundance of favorable characteristics in that population.


   Some favorable characteristics for survival and reproduction are;
   • Escaping from predators - defense
   • Tolerating physical conditions – stress conditions
   • Obtaining food
   • Resistance against disease
   • Fertilizing probability
   • Number of offspring produced
   Process of natural selection
   • Over production
   • Variation
   • Competition and survival of the ﬁttest
   • Natural selection of favourable traits
Neo-Darwinism
  Neo-Darwinism generally denotes the integration of Charles Darwin’s theory of natural
  selection, Mendelian genetics as the basis for biological inheritance and knowledge of
  population genetics.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Hierarchy of taxa on scientiﬁc basis

Methods of artiﬁcial and natural classiﬁcation
  Arrangement of organisms into groups on the basis of the common characteristics is
  called classiﬁcation. Taxonomy is the scientiﬁc study on classiﬁcation, identiﬁcation,
  nomenclature and description. This includes placing groups of organisms in a
  hierarchical sequence.
    Two methods of classiﬁcation
    (1) Artiﬁcial classiﬁcation - grouping is based on a few pre selected
    unifying characters.
       • The characters are selected ﬁrst according to convenience and organisms are
         grouped based on the selected criteria
       • Evolutionary relationships are ignored
       • Only system used before 18th century
       • Easy to use, easy to expand by adding more groups
    e.g. Plants can be classiﬁed as cereals, ornamental plants, medicinal plants,
        poisonous plants etc. Animals can be classiﬁed as two legged, four
        legged, six legged, eight legged etc.
    (2) Natural classiﬁcation - grouping based on true relationships.
       • Represent s evolutionary relationships based on phylogeny- evolutionary history
         of a species or groups of species
       • Systems developed after then study of evolution.
       • Based on many characteristics.
    Characteristics used can be morphological, anatomical, cytological or molecular
    biological such as DNA and RNA base sequences
    e.g. Plants can be classiﬁed into phyla; Bryophyta, Lycophyta, Pterophyta,
        Cycadophyta, Coniferophyta and Anthophyta etc. Animals can be
        classiﬁed into Cnidaria, Platyhelminthes etc.


History of classiﬁcation
  The early classiﬁcation systems were all artiﬁcial systems and were mostly based on
  human uses.
    Aristotle was the ﬁrst to classify organisms scientiﬁcally. He divided organisms into
    plants and animals. Animals were further classiﬁed according to criteria such as mode
    of locomotion, reproduction and presence or absence of red blood cells. Aristotle’s
    pupil Theophrastus classiﬁed plants according to habit. e.g. trees, shrubs and herbs,
    and according to lifespan e.g. annuals, biennials and perennials.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   Up to the time of Linnaeus scientists have used many different methods for naming
   of organisms. Carolus Linnaeus(1753), Swedish botanist, introduced binomial
   nomenclature and also classiﬁed about 6,000 plants into a hierarchical order of taxa,
   classiﬁcation level such as; Species, genus, order, and class. His classiﬁcation of
   ﬂowering plants was based on the number of stamens and styles of ﬂower. He identiﬁed
   two kingdoms of organisms; plants and animals.
   With the discovery of the microorganisms the scientists understood that there were
   organisms which could not be assigned into either plants or animals. To get over
   this difﬁculty Ernest Haeckel (1866) introduced a third kingdom: Protista. He also
   introduced the taxon Phylum and classiﬁed many organisms.


   With the discovery of the electron microscope biologists identiﬁed prokaryotic and
   eukaryotic cellular organization. Robert H Whittaker (1969) introduced the ﬁve
   kingdom system of biological classiﬁcation; Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae and
   Animalia. His classiﬁcation was based on the nature of cellular organization, unicellular
   or multicellular and mode of nutrition.


   With the acceptance of Darwin’s theory of the evolution and unitary origin of life,
   taxonomists began to use natural systems with interpreting evolutionary relationships.
   With the recent advancement of molecular biology and the use of molecular methods
   in studying evolutionary relationships it became apparent that in the very early
   evolution some prokaryotes differ as much from each other as do from eukaryotes.
   Such difﬁculties have lead biologists to adopt three Domain system of classiﬁcation.
   The three domains are Bacteria, Archea and Eukarya, which are taxonomic ranks
   higher than the Kingdom. Carl Woese (1977) introduced this three domain system.,


   In this tree of life the ﬁrst major split in the history of life occurred when bacteria
   diverged from others. Eukarya and Archea are mostly related to each other than
   bacteria.


   Present system of classiﬁcation and its basis
   The present system of classiﬁcation is mainly based on the rapid advance of molecular
   biology and the new information on the evolutionary relationships of organisms.
   • the sequence of bases of DNA of important genes
   • the sequences of bases of DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts
   • the base sequence of ribosomal RNA
   • the sequence of amino acids in common proteins
   • the molecular structure of cellular components
   are used as important taxonomic criteria in modern systematics.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    However, the kingdom Protista is not a natural group. It is an artiﬁcial group including
    organisms which have different evolutionary origins.
    Viruses do not have cellular organization, and therefore do not belong to any of the
    kingdoms. They are also an artiﬁcial group considered separately.


    Hierarchy of Taxa from Domains to Species
    The taxonomic unit at any level/ rank of the hierarchy is called a taxon (plural-taxa).
    Each taxon has a rank and a name.
    e.g. Panthera is a taxon at the Genus level/ rank
       Mammalia is a taxon at the Class level/ rank
    Under the hierarchical system there are levels/ ranks of taxa. Each Domain is divided
    into kingdoms. A Kingdom is divided into phyla (singular phylum), phylum into
    classes .etc. Many of these categories may also be subdivided.
    e.g. Super class, Sub-family, Subspecies, etc.




    From domain to species, the number of shared characteristics among the members
    in the taxa increases. From species to domain, the number of individuals in the taxon
    increases.


    Biological deﬁnition of a species
    Species is a group of organisms who shares similar characteristics and has the ability
    to interbreed and produce viable and fertile offspring.


    Other deﬁnitions of species
      • Morphological species concept- use of morphological criteria to distinguish
         species such as body shape and other structural features
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

      • Ecological species concept–deﬁnes species in terms of its ecological niche and
        the sum of how members of the species interact with the non living and the living
        components of their environment
      • Phylogenetic species concept – deﬁnes the species as the smallest group of
        individuals that share a common ancestor.
   Binomial nomenclature
   In classiﬁcation, use of common names for organisms, causes confusion. More over
   some common names do not actually reﬂect the kind of organism they signify.
        e.g.     Jelly ﬁsh (a Cnidarian)
                Cray ﬁsh (a Crustacian)
                Silver ﬁsh (an insect)
                Star ﬁsh (an Echinoderm)
   Further, a given organism has different names in different languages. Carolous
   Linnaeus (1707-1778) proposed a binomial system of nomenclature of species, which
   was accepted worldwide to avoid ambiguity.
   According to the binomial nomenclature the name of an organism has two parts:
   First is the generic name, to which the species belongs and the second is a speciﬁc
   epithet, the unique for each species within the genus. Generic name is usually a noun
   and the speciﬁc epithet an adjective describing a particular feature.
                e.g. Homo sapiens- Homo means man, sapiens means intelligent
   Related species have the same generic name with different speciﬁc epithets.
      e.g. Dipterocarpus zeylanicus and Dipterocarpus grandiﬂorus
   Dipterocarpus zeylanicus means fruit with two wings, and endemic to Sri Lanka.
   Dipterocarpus grandiﬂorus means fruit with two wings and having large ﬂowers.

International codes of Binominal nomenclature

Biologists have adopted sets of rules or Codes of nomenclature. These codes are slightly
different for plants, animals, bacteria and viruses. Some of the important rules for
naming plants, fungi, bacteria and animals are as follows.
      • Two species of organisms cannot have the same name.
      • Each species has a generic name and a speciﬁc epithet, both together forming the
        species name or scientiﬁc name.
      • The Name should be made up of Latinized words written in the Roman script.
      • It should be underlined when hand written and italicized when printed.
      • The ﬁrst letter of the generic name must be capitalized the and speciﬁc epithet
        must be in simple letters.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    In scientiﬁc writing, the name of the author who gave the name is indicated by a capital
    letter, an abbreviation or full word at the end of the name, which is not Latinized.
    e.g. Cocos nucifera L., (L for Linnaeus).
    A third word can be used to represent a subspecies or a variety, example Panthera
    parduskotiya (Sri Lankan leopard).


•     Use of keys
    • Used to group organisms and identify them
    • Keys do not show the evolutionary relationships
    • The Commonly used key is the dichotomous key
    • Some examples are given below


    Example 1: Silverﬁsh, Butterﬂy, House ﬂy, Beetle
    1. Possesses wings …………………………………………………. (2)
       Do not possess wings ………………………………………….. Silverﬁsh
    2. Possess two pairs of wings …………………………………… (3)
       Do not possesses two pairs of wings………………………………Houseﬂy
    3. Possesses a proboscis ……...………………………………....Butterﬂy
       Do not possess a proboscis ………………......…….............,.Beetle


    Example 2: Snake, Earthworm, Frog, Sea anemone, Butterﬂy
    1. Radially symmetrical body ………………………………….Sea anemone
       Not having a radially symmetrical body …………...…… … ……..(2)
    2. Possess legs……………………....…………………………………(3)
       Do not possesses legs ……………………………………………...(4)
    3. Wings present……………………………………….................                      Butterﬂy
       Wings absent……...…………………………………................                      Frog
    4 Body covered by scales ...……………………………………                            Snake
       Body is not covered by scales    .……………………………                      Earthworm


Domains
  There are three domains. They are;
    a) Domain – Bacteria- consists of one kingdom. Kingdom - Bacteria
    b) Domain –Archaea-consists of one kingdom. Kingdom - Archaebacteria
    c) Domain –Eukarya-consists of four kingdoms.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book
        Kingdom - Protista
        Kingdom - Fungi
        Kingdom - Plantae
        Kingdom - Animalia


The diversity of organisms within the Domain Bacteria
Key characteristics of Domain Bacteria
     • They are prokaryotic
      • They are unicellular, colonial, ﬁlamentous
      • Most of them are found in size between 0.5 to 5µm
      • Well adapted to most of the ‘normal’ habitats (both land and water)
      • Most of them contain peptidoglycan in their cell walls
      • According to the amount of peptidoglycan present in the cell wall they are
        classiﬁed as Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria
      • Most of their cell walls are surrounded by a sticky layer of polysaccharides or
        proteins called capsule
      • Most of them have ﬂagella for motility. Bacterial ﬂagellum differs from
        eukaryotic ﬂagellum as they are not covered by a plasma membrane and absence
        of 9+2 structure of microtubules.
      • Possess diverse nutritional modes-Autotrophs, heterotrophs
      • Posses diverse metabolic modes- obligate aerobes, obligate anaerobes, facultative
        anaerobes, etc.
      • Some are capable of performing nitrogen ﬁxation- e.g. Rhizobium sp., some
        cyanobacteria
      • Rapid reproduction by binary ﬁssion. Some perform conjugation as a sexual
        method.
      • Certain bacteria use bacterial chlorophyll as a photosynthetic pigment.


   Key Characteristics of Cyanobacteria
     • Prokaryotic organisms
      • Photosynthetic
      • Most are unicellular and oxygen generating and solitary. But some are linked to
        form ﬁlaments or colonies sheathed in mucous
      • Some have the ability of ﬁxing atmospheric nitrogen
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Key characteristics of Domain Archaea
      • They are prokaryotic and unicellular.
         • They lack peptidoglycan in their cell walls which are made up of proteins and
           polysaccharides
         • The size of most of them is between 0.5-5 m
         • They include extreme halophiles and extreme thermophiles
         • Some Archaeabacteria live in more moderate environments-Methanogens
         • Other species inhabits the anaerobic guts of cattle, termites and other herbivores
    Key characteristics of Domain Eukarya
    • They are Eukaryotic
    • Vary in size
    • Most of them are multicellular
    • Habitats are diverse
    • Diverse in nutrition
    • Mostly aerobes
    • Most of them exhibit sexual reproduction (some protists are only known
    to reproduce asexually)
    Table 3.1: A comparison of the three domains of life
          Characteristic             Bacteria              Archea                    Eukarya

     1    Cellular               Prokaryotic           Prokaryotic            Eukaryotic
          organization
     2    Cell wall              Peptidoglycan         Proteins and           Cellulose,
          composition                                  polysaccharides        Hemicellulose,
                                                       (lack                  Pectin and
                                                       peptidoglycan)         Chitin

     3    Membrane lipids        Unbranched            Some branched          Unbranched
                                 hydrocarbons          hydrocarbons           hydrocarbons

     4    Genetic Composition
          Histones associated Absent                   Present in some               Present
          with DNA                                     species
          Circular            Present                  Present                Absent
          chromosomes
          Introns in          Very rare                Present in some        Present in
          genes                                        genes                  many genes
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                 Resource Book

    5    Protein synthesis

         RNA polymerase           One kind            Several kinds             Several kinds


         Initiator amino          Formyl-             Methionine                Methionine
         acids for protein        methionine
         synthesis
    6    Response to              Growth inhibited Growth not                   Growth not
         antibiotics                               inhibited                    inhibited
         Streptomycin
         and
         Chloramphenicol
    7    Growth at                  No                   Some species               No
         temperatures >
         100˚C
    8    Habitats                 Diverse habitats    extreme                   Diverse
                                                      environmental             habitats
                                                      conditions-volcanic
                                                      pits/ hot springs/ salt
                                                      marshes etc.


    9    Examples                 Bacteria,           Archaebacteria;           Protists
                                  cyanobacteria;      Methanococcus             fungis
                                  Nostoc,             Thermococcus.,            plants and
                                  Anabaena ,,         Helobacteria .            animals
                                  Escherichia coli,
                                  Salmonella typhi


The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Protista
Key characteristics of Kingdom Protista
     • Most of them are unicellular, although there are some colonial and multi cellular
       species
        • It is a polyphyletic group (originated from more than one ancestor) and an
          artiﬁcial group in classiﬁcation.
        • Found in freshwater, marine and damp soil, some are symbionts.
        • Unicellular, colonial or multicellular.
        • Some are photoautotrophs, some are heterotrophs and some are mixotrophs
          (combination of photoautotrophic and heterotrophic nutrition).
Resource Book                                               G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Euglena
      • Unicellular, lack cell wall and pellicle present.
       • Chloroplasts are present.
       • They have one or two ﬂagella
       • They have eye spot
       • Contractile vacuole is present
       • They have a pocket at one end of the cell from which one or
         two ﬂagella emerged.


    Paramecium
    • Habitat is freshwater
    • Lack cell wall but pellicle is present, unicellular
    • Cilia may completely cover the cell surface
    • They have two types of nuclei- mega nucleus
      and micronucleus
    • Contractile and food vacuoles are present
    • Oral groove is present


    Amoeba
    • Aquatic (marine and freshwater) forms are free
    living others are parasitic.
    • Lack cell walls, unicellular organisms
    • They form pseudopodia which are used to
      locomote and feed
    • They do not have deﬁnite shape.
    • Food vacuoles are present
    Ulva
    • Macroscopic marine forms.
    • Cell wall present
    • Multicellular thallus differentiated into leaf like
    blades    and root like holdfast.
    • Green in colour (green algae)
    Gelidium
    • Marine.
    • Cell walls present
    • Multicellular thallus with hold fast.
    • It is greenish red in colour (red algae)
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                               Resource Book
   Sargassum
   • Marine
   • Comparatively larger and complex
   • Thallus is plant- like; it consists of a root
     like holdfast ,stem like stipe and leaf like
     blade.
   • Multi cellular, thallus is supported by gas
     ﬁlled bulb shape ﬂoats.
   • Appear in olive green or brown colour (brown algae)


   Diatoms
   • It is aquatic (fresh water and marine)
   • Unicellular, having glass like, wall
     consists of two parts that overlap
     (presence of silica)
   • Highly diverse group regarding the shape
     and markings in the surface
   • Golden brown in colour (golden brown
     algae)


The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Plantae

Kingdom Plantae
  Evolutionary relationships among major groups of plants




                      Fig 3.1 Evolutionary relationship of najor groups of plants
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    It is believed that members of the kingdom Plantae were evolved from a group of
    chlorophytes/ green algae. Most of them are terrestrial organisms. Chlorophyte algae
    lack key traits of land plants, walled spores produced in sporangia, multicellular
    gametangia, dependent embryo and apical meristem. They evolved in the terrestrial
    environment.


    Plant groups can be distinguished based on the presence or absence of an extensive
    system of vascular tissue. Based on that there are two major groups of plants the can
    be seen; they are Vascular plants and Non-vascular plants.




Diversiﬁcation of Kingdom Plantae
  • Non-vascular plants
            •   Phylum Bryophyta - Mosses- Pogonatum
            •   Phylum Hepatophyta- Marchantia
            •   Phylum- Anthocerophyta- Anthoceros
    • Vascular seedless plants
        •       Phylum – Lycophyta- Selaginella
        •       Phylum – Pterophyta- Nephrolepis
    •       Vascular seed plants
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book
      •   Gymnosperms- Phylum – Cycadophyta (Cycas sp.),
          Phylum- Coniferophyta (Pinus ), Phylum – Gnetophyta (Gnetum )
      •    Angiosperms- Phylum – Anthophyta (all ﬂowering plants)
Non-vascular plants
 One way to distinguish a group of plants is to see whether or not they have an
 extensive system of vascular tissue that transport water and nutrients throughout the
 plant body. Most present day plants do have a complex vascular tissue system and
 therefore, are called vascular plants. Plants that do not have an extensive transport
 system are described as non vascular plants. Non vascular plants are informally named
 as Bryophytes.
      e.g. Marchantia, Pogonatum, Antheroceros
   Bryophytes share some derived traits with vascular plants, but lackin many innovations
   of vascular plants such as presence of true stems, roots and leaves.


   Diversity of Bryophytes
   Phylum- Hepatophyta e.g. Marchantia (liverworts).
   Phylum Anthocerophyta e.g. Anthoceros (hornworts)
   Phylum Bryophyta e.g. Pogonatum (mosses)


Characteristic features of phylum Bryophyta
  e.g. Pogonatum
      • Especially common in moist terrestrial places.
      • Haploid gametophyte is dominant stage of the life cycle, photosynthetic and
        independent.
      • Gametophytes are differentiated into ‘leaves’, ‘stems’ and rhizoids. They have
        no vascular tissues. Archegonia and antheridia are typically carries on separate
        female and male gametophyte. Therefore gametophyte is dioecious.
      • Male plant produces ﬂagellated sperm which can swim through a ﬁlm of water
        for fertilization.
      • Sporophytes are usually green and photosynthetic when young. However, they
        are not independent. They attach to their parental gametophytes and absorb
        nutrients and water from the female gametophyte.
      • Sporophytes have specialized pores called stomata which are also found in all
        vascular plants.
      • They are homosporous.
   Vascular plants cover about 93% of the existing plant species. They can be further
   divided into two groups.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    1. Seedless vascular plants
    2. Seed plants


Seedless vascular plants
  Seedless vascular plants lack seeds and disperse by
  means of spores. They are categorized into two groups.
    1. Lycophytes
    2. Pterophytes
    Even though, both pterophytes and lycophytes are seedless plants, pterophytes share a
    more recent common ancestor with seed plants.
    Fossils and living seedless vascular plants provide evidence for plant evolution during
    Devonian and Carboniferous periods. The ancestors of vascular plants already have
    had some derived traits of modern vascular plants; however, they lack roots and some
    other adaptations.
    Fossils suggest that, the ancestors of vascular plants had gametophyte and sporophytes
    that were about equal in size. However among the living vascular plants sporophyte
    generation is large and more complex. For example in ferns, leafy plants are the
    sporophytes


Signiﬁcant features of seedless vascular plants;
   1. Transportation through Xylem and Phloem
   Vascular plants have two types of vascular tissues; Xylem and Phloem
    Xylem consists of tracheids, ﬁbers and parenchyma cells- conducts water and minerals.
    Cell walls of tracheids and ﬁbers are strengthened by the polymer lignin. These tissues
    permit plants to grow tall. This may facilitate them to obtain a high amount of light
    for photosynthesis and ease the spore dispersal.
    Phloem- this tissue has cells arranged in tubes. They distribute sugars, amino acids
    and other organic products among different parts of the plant.
    2. Evolution of roots
    Roots are organs that absorb water and nutrients from the soil. They anchor the plants
    and allow the shoot system to grow taller. They are to replace the rhizoids seen in
    bryophytes. Root tissues of living plants resemble stem tissues of the early vascular
    plants preserved in fossils.


    3. Evolution of leaves- There are two types of leaves. They are microphylls and
    megaphylls. Microphylls are single veined and smaller in size while megaphylls are
    large, ﬂattened with branched veins.
    Leaves with branched vascular tissues increase the surface area for efﬁcient
    photosynthesis (megaphylls).
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book
   Sporophylls and spore variations
   Modiﬁed leaves that bear sporangia are known as sporophylls. Most seedless vascular
   plant species produce one type of sporangium and one type of spores. Therefore, they
   are known as homosporous.
   Some plant species produce two types of sporangia and produce two kinds of spores
   called mega spores and microspores. This condition is known as heterosporous.
   Mega spores develop into female gametophyte while microspores develop into male
   gametophyte.


   Phylum Lycophyta
     • Lycophytes are terrestrial and some are epiphytes.
      • The dominant plant is sporophyte.
      • They produce upright stems and ground hugging stems.
      • In upright stems small leaves can be found.
      • Ground hugging stems produce dichotomously branching roots.
      • They have strobili. In many club mosses and spike mosses sporophylls are
        clustered into club shaped cones/ strobili.
      • They are homosporous or heterosporous.


   Spike mosses are usually relatively smaller and often grow horizontally.
   • All Club mosses are homosporous;
      e.g. Lycopodium sp.
   • All Spike mosses are heterosporous.
      e.g. Selaginella




                                     In some species the tiny gametophyte live above
                                     the ground and are photosynthetic. Others live
                                     below the ground and are nourished by symbiotic
                                     fungi.
   Phylum Pterophyta
   • Most sporophytes have rhizome (an underground stem)
   • At the tip of the rhizome they produce leaves, called fronds
   • Many fronds are highly dissected and feathery.
   • All species are homosporous which develop into a bisexual gametophyte.
   • Sporophytes are dominant
      e.g. Nephrolepis.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Seed plants
    Vascular plants consist of seeds and are a called
    “seed plants”. They represent the vast majority of
    living plant species.
    Seed plants can be divided into two groups, based
    on the absence or presence of enclosed chambers in
    which seeds mature.
       1. Gymnosperms
       2. Angiosperms
    Gymnosperms are “naked seed” plants as their seeds are not enclosed in chambers.
    Angiosperms are “seed plant” group accommodating all ﬂowering plants. Angiosperm
    seeds develop inside chambers called ovaries; which originate within ﬂowers and
    mature into fruits.


Signiﬁcant features of seed plants
   1. Production of seed
    A seed consists of an embryo and endosperm. Endosperms supply food to the embryo.
    This endosperm is surrounded by a protective coat which is known as seed coat. When
    seeds are mature they can be dispersed through various dispersal methods.
    Seeds are key adaptations that help seed plants to become the dominant producers on
    land and to exhibit the vast plant diversity of today.


    2. Reduced gametophyte
    The evolutionary trend of gametophyte reduction continued further in the vascular
    plants and led to seed plants. The gametophyte of seed vascular plants is not visible to
    the naked eye. They are mostly microscopic.
    Tiny gametophytes develop from spores and are retained within the sporangia of
    sporophyte. This arrangement protects the gametophyte from environmental stresses.
    The moist reproductive tissues of the sporophyte shield the gametophyte from UV
    radiation and protect them from drying out. This relationship also enables the dependant
    gametophyte to obtain nutrients from the sporophyte.


    3. Heterospory
    Seed plants are heterosporous (produce both megaspores and microspores). Each
    megasporangium has a single functional megaspore and each microsporangium
    contains a large number of microspores.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   4. Production of ovules and eggs
   Seed plants are unique in retaining the megasporangium within the parent sporophyte.
   A layer of sporophyte tissue called integument envelops which protects the
   megasporangium.
   The entire structure, containing megasporangium, megaspore and integuments is
   called an ovule. Inside each ovule female gametophyte develops from a megaspore
   and produces one or more eggs.


   5. Production of pollen and sperms
   A microspore develops into pollen grain that consists of a male gametophyte enclosed
   within the pollen wall. The wall of the pollen is tough as it is made up of the polymer
   sporopollenin, which protects the pollen grain during pollination. The transfer of
   pollen grain towards the ovule is called pollination. When a pollen germinates, it gives
   rise to a pollen tube that discharges sperm (male gametes) into the female gametophyte
   located within the ovule.


   Inside a pollen grain, a sperm producing male gametophyte is present. The sperms of
   seed plants do not require motility as they are carried directly in to the eggs by pollen
   tubes. Some gymnosperms retain the ancient ﬂagellated condition, however ﬂagella
   have been lost in the sperm of most gymnosperms and all angiosperms.


Phylum Gnetophyta
  e.g. Gnetum
   • Only gymnosperms have vessels in xylem
   • Leaves of gymnosperms look like those of the ﬂowering
     plants. Their seeds, look like fruits of angiosperms.




   Phylum Cycadophyta
   • They have palm like leaves and large
       cones
   • They have ﬂagellated sperms similar
     to those of seedless vascular plants
      e.g. Cycas
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Phylum Coniferophyta
      e.g: Pinus
    • Large trees are included such as Cyperes and Red
      woods.
    • In conifers two types of spores are produced by
       separate cones.


    Phylum Anthophyta - Angiosperms
    Presence of ﬂowers -
        • Stamens produce microspores and these microspores develop into pollen grains
        • These pollen grains contain male gametophyte/ gametes
        • Carpels produce megaspores and these megaspores produce female gametophytes/
          embryo sac
        • Seeds are enclosed within the carpels
    •    Production of fruits- seeds are protected by fruits which help in their dispersal.
         This is one of the unique features of phylum Anthophyta. A fruit typically consists
         of a fertilized ovary and sometimes include other persistent ﬂoral parts. After
         fertilization, the ovary wall thickens and develops into fruit. Ovules develop as
         seed of the fruit. Thr fruit protects dormant seeds and aid in their dispersal.

    Diversity of Angiosperms
    The ﬂowering plants (angiosperms) are divided into two groups based mainly on the
    number of cotyledons in their embryo.
    These two groups are;
        1. Monocotyledons- species with one cotyledons
        2. Dicotyledons- species with two cotyledons


    Table 3 .2- Comparison of monocots and Dicots
         Class – Monocotyledoneae                 Class – Dicotyledoneae
         The embryos have only one              Embryos have two cotyledons
         cotyledon
         Fibrous root system                    Tap root system
         Parallel veins in leaves               Reticulate veins in leaves
         Flower parts are trimerous             Flowers are pentamerous or
                                                tetramerous
         Perianth present in ﬂowers (No         Distinct calyx and corolla present
         distinct calyx and corolla)            in ﬂowers
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

       Pollen grains are with one           Pollen grains are with three
       opening/ aperture                    openings/ apertures

       Vascular bundles in the stem         Vascular bundles in the stem have
       do not have cambia and are           cambia and arranged in a ring
       scattered                            e.g. Rose, shoe ﬂower, cucurbits
       e.g. grasses, coconut, rice


The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Fungi

Kingdom Fungi

   Characteristic features of Kingdom Fungi
   • Eukaryotic
   • Cell walls are made up of chitin a strong but ﬂexible polysaccharide.
   • They are absorptive and heterotrophs - many of them secrete extra
   cellular    enzymes which aid in the breaking down of complex molecules
   into small molecules.
   • Different species live as decomposers, parasites or mutualistics.
   • Few are unicellular, others forming multicellular ﬁlaments called hyphae .
   • Septa can be found in hyphae. (division of hyphae into cells by septa –
     cross walls).
      • Septum has a hole which enables the movement of mitochondria, ribosomes,
        nuclei etc.
      • Fungi lack septa are known as coenocytic fungi (with many nuclei)
   • Fungal hyphae produce mycelium
   • Some fungi produce haustoria ( to penetrate and absorb or exchange
   nutrients between plants and the fungi)
   • Multicellular fungi produce mycelia. ( a network of branched hyphae
     adapted for absorption of nutrition)
   • They show sexual and asexual reproduction.
   • They produce spores.


   Characteristic features of Phylum Chytridiomycota
    e.g.: Chytridium
   • Aquatic or terrestrial .
   • Some are decomposers while others are parasitic.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    • Multicellular or unicellular when multicellular it is coenocytic.
    • They produce zoospores which are ﬂagellated.
    • Cell walls are made up of chitin.
    • Some of them form colonies with hyphae while others exit as single
      spherical cell.


    Characteristic features of Phylum Zygomycota
     e.g. Mucor , Rhizopus
        • Most of them are saprotrophs and some of them are parasites or commensals.
        • Mycelium is coenocytic and aseptate. Septa found only where reproductive cells
          are formed.
        • Asexual reproduction: Produce sporangia in which genetically identical haploid
          spores are produced. Also by endospores produced in sporangia.
        • Sexual reproduction: A Zygosporangium is produced which is a sturdy structure
          produced by plasmogamy and karyogamy. Zygosporangium is resistant to
          unfavorable environmental conditions.
         o      Zygosporangium is a multinucleated structure which is resistant
                to drying and freezing.
         o      They are metabolically inactive in adverse environmental
                conditions.
    • Zygosporangium produces genetically diverse haploid spores when
      environmental conditions are favourable.


    Characteristic features of Phylum Ascomycota
    e.g. Aspergillus, Saccharomyces, Penicillium
    • Marine or freshwater or terrestrial
    •   Parasitic or symbiotic.
    • Most of them are decomposers.
    • Unicellular or ﬁlamentous, multicellular.
    • In asexual reproduction conidia are produced at the tip of the conidiphores which
      are specialized hyphae. (Exospores in clusters or chains)
    • In sexual reproduction fusion of sexually differentiated gametangia takes
      place and produce sac like structure called asci.
    • Ascospores are produced within asci. Generally there are eight ascospores are
      produced in each ascus.
    • Most of these fungi produce ascocarps enclosing asci.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book


   Characteristic features of Phylum Basidiomycota
   e.g. Agaricus, Puffballs, Shell fungi
   • They are Terrestrial.
   • They are major decomposers and some are symbionts.
   • Filamentous with septae and dikaryotic.
   • Mycelium is the dominant stage of the life cycle.
   • They produce fruiting bodies called basidiocarps during sexual
     reproduction. Produce basidia on the gills of the basidiocarp.
   • Produce basidiospores on basidium and exogenous.


The diversity of organisms within the kingdom Animalia

Kingdom Animalia

Characteristic features of Kingdom Animalia
  • Multicellular
   • Heterotrophic eukaryotes- they ingest food and digest them in the body
     using enzymes
   • Cells of the animals are organized into tissues.
   • Most of them reproduce by sexually.
   • Some show radial symmetry and some others show bilateral symmetry.

Phylum Cnidaria
  Characteristic features of each example are not necessary
    e.g. Hydra, Sea anemone, Obelia, Corals and Jelly ﬁsh




                       Obelia,                    Jelly ﬁsh
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                Hydra                                Coral polyp

       • Majority of them are marine, except a few fresh water species. Some are
         macroscopic.
       • Simple organization: diploblastic or just 2 body cell layers- an outer layers of
         ectoderm and inner layer of endoderm sandwitched between these two layers is
         a acellular layer of mesoglea
       • They have a simple gastrovascular cavity which is a sac with a central digestive
         compartment. This cavity is lined by endodermis with a single opening (mouth)
         only.
       • They show radial symmetry with two body forms polyp and medusa. Polyps
         are cylindrical forms attached to the substrate by the aboral end of the body.
         Tentacles are found around the mouth.
       • Medusa resembles a ﬂattened mouth down version of the polyps and they are
         free living.
       • Some cnidarians exist only as polyps or only as medusa. Others have both polyp
         and medusa forms in their lifecycles.
       • Tentacles are armed with cnidocytes which functioning defense and capturing
         prey.
       • They have nematocysts which contain stinging thread.

Phylum Platyhelminthes
  Characteristic features of each examples are not necessary
   e.g. Planaria, Taenia , Fasciola




                                                            Fasciola

                               Planaria
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

      • Commonly known as ﬂatworms.
      • Free living (Planaria) or parasitic (ﬂukes
        and tapeworms).
      • They are found in marine, fresh water and in
        damp terrestrial habitats.
      • Body is dorsoventrally ﬂattened. Some have
        elongated tape like body forms without
                                                                       Taenia
        true segmentation.
      • Triploblastic with all three germ layers
        (ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm). Signs
        of cephalization present but are not distinct.
      • No body cavities, circulatory, respiratory and skeletal systems.The gaseous
        exchange is by simple diffusion through body wall.
      • Sensory organs are found only in free living examples. Eye spots are found in
        the head.
      • First appearance of little complex nervous and sensory system. A pair of anterior
        ganglion and two longitudinal nerve cords on central nervous system.
      • Appearance of separate organs for excretion: Nitrogenous excretory system
        consists of protonephridia. These are a network of tubules with ciliated structures
        called ﬂame bulb. These are used to maintain the osmotic balance.
      • They have incomplete digestive system only with mouth without anus. Branched
        gastrovascular cavity is present for digestion. Some are having eversible pharynx.
      • Free living examples have cilia for the locomotion.
      • Some show asexual reproduction by regeneration. All are bisexual. Except tape
        worms (Taenia). Others have cross fertilization which is internal. In parasitic
        forms there are several larval stages, direct development in free living examples
        without larval stages.

   Phylum Nematoda (charactcristic features of eachexamples are not necessary)
    e.g. round worms, hook worms, pin worms




                    round worm          hook worm               pin worm
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


       • Most of them are free living in marine, few are fresh water and damp soil
         environments and parasitic in plants and animals.
       • They are bilateral symmetrical. Triploblastic with pseudocoelomic .Their body
         forms are cylindrical with tapered ends. Body size varies from microscopic to
         macroscopic. They do not show distinct cephalization and segmentation. The
         sensory papillae are found on the anterior end of the body. Body is covered by
         tough cuticle and undergoes ecdysis.
       • No circulatory and respiratory systems. Gaseous exchange is by simple diffusion
         through body wall. They have an Alimentary canal.
       • Body wall is composed only of longitudinal muscles. They do not have special
         locomotary structures. Longitudinal muscles in the body wall are involved in
         locomotion.
       • The Sexual reproduction is by internal fertilization. Sexes are separated and
         females are larger than males.
    Phylum Annelida
       Characteristic features of each examples are not necessary
        e.g. Earthworms, Leeches and regworms.




                       Earth worm                                   Leech


       • They can be marine, freshwater or in damp soil.
       • They are segmented worms with cylindrical bodies
       • They are Triploblastic.
       • Coelom (true body cavity) is present for the ﬁrst time.
       • The ﬁrst animals to show cephalization.
       • Nervous system well developed; dorsal cerebral ganglion, ventral nerve chord,
         circumenteric connectives.
       • Clitellum, Parapodia, setae and suckers are found in some examples. Clitellum
         is for external fertilization. Parapodia is used for locomotion and respiration.
         Seate are present for locomotion and suckers for locomotion and ingestion in
         ecto parasitic forms.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

   Phylum Mollusca
   Characteristic features of each examples are not necessary
   e.g. Oysters, Clams, Slugs, Snails, Octupus, Squids, Chitons and tusks shells




                  Squid                               Octopus




                 Snail
                                                        clam




              chiton                                 tusk shell




        Oyster
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

       • Majority are marine. Some inhabit freshwater and land. Some are bilateral
         symmetrical and few are asymmetrical.
       • They are soft bodied and non-segmented. Calcareous shell is secreted as a
         protective exoskeleton. Coelomic.
       • Body is divided into three parts:
          o        muscular foot is used for locomotion
          o        visceral mass contains most of the internal organs
          o        mantale is to secrete the shell
       • Shell could be internal or external.
       • Many molluscs possess radula (a minutely toothed, chitinous ribbon) in the
         mouth for feeding.
       • Most molluscs have separated sexes and their gonads are located in visceral
         mass.


    Phylum Arthropoda
      Characteristic features of each examples are not necessary
     e.g. Insects, Spiders, Prawns, Crabs, Scorpions, Ticks, Mites, Millipedes
    and Centipedes.




                Spider                                           Mite
                                          Scorpion




         Tick                       Centepede
                                                                  Millepede
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                           Resource Book
      • One of the most successful animal groups on earth with the highest number of
        species. They live everywhere – air, water, soil
      • They have segmented bodies with “jointed legs”
      • They have a chitinous exoskeleton (skeleton on the outside) Because of
        exoskeleton these animals can’t grow continuously and needs periodic molting
      • The nervous system is well developed with primitive dorsal brain.
      • The nerve cord is solid, segmented and ventrally located.
      • They have many and varied sense organs.
      • They have an open blood circulatory system; Blood is pumped by a heart into
        the body cavities (haemocoel), where tissues are surrounded by the blood. No
        capillaries.
      • Respiration
        • In aquatic animals- Gills
        • In terrestrial animals- Tracheal system of chitinous tubes
        • In arachnids - Book lungs
      • Excretion is by Malphigian tubules They excrete uric acids
      • Reproduction: Sexes separate [Dioecious]


   Phylum Echinodermata
   Characteristic features of each examples are not necessary
   e.g.sea stars, brittle stars, sea lily, feather star, sea cucumber, sea urchins and sand
   dollars




                                  Sea star
                                                                             Sea lily




                                                                            Sand dollar




         Brittle star
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                                                     Sea cucumber




       • They are exclusively marine. Triploblastic and coelomic, slow moving or sessile.
       • Adults are penta radial symmetrical without head and segmentation.
       • Deuterostomes.
       • Thin epidermis covers the endoskeleton of hard calcareous plates.
       • Water vascular system is a network by hydraulic canals branching into tube feet
         which function in locomotion and feeding.
       • Digestive system is usually complete, but the mouth is on the underside and the
         anus on the top surface of the animal.
       • Circulatory system is reduced and closed without a heart. Sexes are separated
         with external fertilization. Larval forms are bilaterally symmetrical.
       • Well developed nervous system. Intelligent animals.


The characteristic features to study organisms belonging to phylum
Chordata

Phylum Chordata
  Characteristic features of Phylum Chordata
     • Longitudinal, ﬂexible rod called notochord located between digestive tube and
       nerve cord. It is extending from anterior to posterior providing support in at least
       embryonic stage.
       • Dorsal, hollow, single nerve cord located dorsal to the notochord.
       • In all chordate embryos there are slits or clefts in pairs either side of pharynx
         (pharyngeal sits) that opens to the outside of body. In terrestrial, adult chordates
         it disappears and remains in the aquatic adults and larval forms of terrestrial
         chordates as respiratory structures.
       • Muscular tail that extends posterior to the anus present in the embryonic stages.
         In some terrestrial adult it is reduced.
         (Characteristic features of each examples of following classes are not necessary)
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

   Characteristic features of class Chondrichthyes
   e.g. Skates, Sharks
      • All are aquatic
      • Skeleton composed predominantly of cartilage
      • Fins for locomotion
      • Caudal ﬁn is heterocercal.
      • Gills without operculum.
      • Body is covered with placcoid scales.
      • Eggs are fertilized internally. Some are ovoviviparous and others are oviparous
        or viviparous.
      • Reproductive tract, excretory duct and digestive tract empty into the cloaca, a
        common chamber that has a single opening to the outside.
   Characteristic features of Class Osteichthyes
     • All are aquatic
      • Having a skeleton composed of bones.
      • Gills are covered by a bony ﬂap called operculum.
      • Swim bladder for control the buoyancy.
      • Caudal ﬁn is homocercal.
      • Body is covered by ﬂatten bony scales called ctenoid and cycloid scales.
      • Most are fertilized externally some have internal fertilization.
      • Most species are oviparous.
        e.g. Carp, Tuna,
   Characteristic features of Amphibia
     • First animals to invade land but need water to complete life cycle, live in both
       water and on land.
      • They are found only on land or fresh waters. No marine species.
      • First species to poses limbs, body is somewhat elevated by these limbs to help
        locomotion in terrestrial environment.
      • Some are limbless but some are tetrapods.
      • Ectothermic- changes body temperature according to environmental temperature.
        This restricts metabolism.
      • Body is covered with thin, moist skin. No scales. Sensitive to environmental
        changes.
      • Nictitating membrane covers the eye and tympanic membrane is found behind
        the eye.
      • Most amphibians show external fertilization. Eggs without shells.
         e.g. Toad, Frog, Ichthyophis
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Characteristic features of Reptilia
       • They are the ﬁrst animal to live a complete terrestrial life.
       • Possess limbs for locomotion and digits.
       • Body is covered with keratinized scales to prevent from desiccation and abrasion.
       • Poses lungs for aerial respiration.
       • They are ectothermic (cold blooded)
       • Live in terrestrial and aquatic habitats.
       • Internal fertilization. They lay shelled eggs (calcareous) on land.
         e.g. Lizards, Snakes, Turtles, Crocodiles and Alligators


Characteristic features of Aves
    • Body is covered by keratinized feathers.
       • Hind limbs are converted to ﬂight.
       • Many adaptations to help ﬂying: light body, wings, bones with air cavities, high
         metabolism, restrictions in body size
       • They are having a beak without teeth.
       • They are endothermic.
       • Birds have colour vision and excellent eye sight.
       • Internal fertilization, lay shelled eggs
         e.g. Crow, Parrot, Humming birds, Eagles etc.
Characteristic features of Mammalia
    • Nourish young by producing milk with mammary glands.
       • Body covered with hair for insulation.
       • They are endothermic group of animals and most of them have high metabolic
         rate.
       • They have differentiated teeth.
       • They have an efﬁcient respiratory system with lungs.
       • A complete circulatory systems and a four chambered heart.
       • Muscular diaphragm is found to help respiration.
       • They have a larger brain with compared to the other group of vertebrates. Very
         intelligent animals. Learning skills and a good memory.
       • Different methods of communication.
       • Show relatively long periods of parental care.
          e.g. Bat, whales, monkeys, cows
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book



   04
  Plant form and function


Structure, Growth and Development of Plants


   T    he main focus of this unit is on structure, growth and development of vascular
        plants.
   Plants consist of a root system and a shoot system and roots and shoots grow at their
   tips, which are with meristematic properties and called as apices, buds or meristems.


   Types of plant tissues, structure- function relationship
   A Tissue is a group of one or more cell types which carries out specialized function(s).
   Meristems, locations and role in plant growth
   Plants have undifferentiated tissues called meristems, consisting of cells which
   constantly divide under suitable conditions and produce new cells. Some of these cells
   then elongate and differentiate to produce new tissues of the plant body and others
   remain as meristems. Meristems may have dormant periods. Due to the action of
   meristem new cells are added. Subsequently these cells get differentiated and therefore
   plant growth occurs by making new plant tissues.

   Characteristics of meristematic cells
   All cells in the meristems have common characteristics. They;
   • are living cells
   • are isodiametric (roughly spherical)
   • are structurally and functionally undifferentiated
   • have a central nucleus
   • have a dense cytoplasm
   • have ability to multiply
   In meristem there are three overlapping zones of cells consisting of cells at successive
   stages of
   • cell division
   • cell elongation and
   • differentiation
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    There are three types of meristems. They are;
    1. apical meristems
    2. lateral meristems
    3. intercalary meristems


    Apical meristems
    These meristems are located at root tips and shoot tips. They add new cells that enable
    increase in length. This process is known as primary growth.


    Lateral meristems
    Vascular cambium and cork cambium are lateral meristems. They are found in woody
    plants and involve in the secondary growth in increasing circumference of roots and
    stems. The vascular cambium produces secondary xylem and secondary phloem. The
    cork cambium produces thick and tough periderm, replacing epidermis.


    Intercalary meristems
    Some monocots such as grasses show meristematic activity at the bases of stems and
    leaves (nodes). These are known as intercalary meristems. They allow rapid regrowth
    in damaged leaves.


    Primary growth of roots
    Elongation of root due to the activity of primary meristems located on root apex is
    called primary growth of the root.
    During the growth three processes take place.
    i. Cell division - due to mitotic division.
    ii. Cell elongation
    iii. Cell maturation - due to differentiation.
    These stages are found in three overlapping regions starting from meristems.


    The zone of cell division includes the root apical meristem and its derivatives. In this
    region, new cells are produced to both sides. Cells produced outward to the apical
    meristem are differentiated to form root cap which prevents damaging the root apical
    meristem from friction when grows through soil.


    Cells produced inward to the meristem undergo elongation, in the zone of cell
    elongation. Root cells elongate, sometimes to more than ten times their original length.
    Hence the root is pushed forward through soil.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                   Resource Book




                 Fig. 4.1 The different zones of the root (zone of differentation , Zone of elonjation
                 and zone of cell divisions
   In the zone of maturation, the cells begin specializing in structure and function where
   cells complete their differentiation and become functionally mature. Primary structure
   of the root is formed as a result of primary growth.


   Primary growth of the shoot:
   Elongation of shoot is due
   to the activity of primary
   meristem located in shoot
   apex, and is called primary
   growth of the shoot.
   A shoot apical meristem
   is a dome-shaped mass of
   dividing cells located at the
   shoot tip.




                 ﬁg 4.2 .The Ls of the Shoot
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Leaves develop from leaf primordia, ﬁnger-like projections along the sides of the
    apical meristems. Normally these primordia cover the shoot apical meristem.
    Shoot apical meristem produces new cells only towards the stem, due to mitosis. After
    cell elongation, cell differentiation takes place.
    Then the primary tissues of the stem are formed due to cell differentiation. Therefore,
    the height of the stem is increased due to primary growth.


    Table 4.1 Differences between shoot apex and root apex
        Shoot apex                                Root apex
        Found at tips of shoot                    Found at the tip of the root
        Protected by leaf primordial              Protected by root cap

        Produces new cells only inwards           Produce new cells both sides
                                                  outwards and inwards


Plant tissue systems
   The new cells originating from the meristems are differentiated to perform specialized
   functions and form a plant tissue system. During differentiation process, they undergo
   changes in cytoplasm, organelles and cell wall. Therefore, several types of plant cells
   can be recognized according to their structure and function.
    A tissue consists of group of one or more cell types which carries out specialized
    function(s).
    Vascular plants have three main tissue systems. They are;
    1. dermal tissue systems
    2. ground tissue systems
    3. vascular tissue systems


    Dermal tissue system
    This is the outer protective covering of plants.
    e.g. Epidermis
       • Protective layer in the stems and roots of the primary plant body and leaves
       • Tightly packed single cell layer
       • Normally covered by a cuticle which is a waxy epidermal coating in aerial parts
       • Specialized cells such as guard cells, trichomes and root hairs are also found in
         epidermis
    Functions of epidermis:
    • Defense against physical damage and pathogens
    • Cuticle helps to prevent water loss
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book

   • Root hairs involve in absorption of water and mineral ions
   • Guard cells help gaseous exchange
   • Trichomes (epidermal outgrowths such as hairs and glands) ;
      o hair like trichomes reduce water loss, shiny hairs reﬂect excess light
      o Some trichomes secrete chemicals involved in defense against insects/
        pathogens/ herbivores,
   Epidermis in older regions of stems and roots is replaced by a protective layer called
   periderm after the secondary growth


   Ground tissue system
   Ground tissue ﬁlls the gap between dermal tissue and vascular tissue, mainly consists
   of cortex (outer to vascular tissue) and pith (inner to vascular tissue). The ground tissue
   includes cells specialized for functions such as storage, photosynthesis, support and
   short distance transport.


   Three main types of cells are present in ground tissue. They are;
   1. parenchyma cells
   2. collenchyma cells
   3. sclerenchyma cells
   Parenchyma cells
     • Living even at functional maturity
      • Mature cells have primary cell walls which are relatively thin, ﬂexible and most
        of the cells lack secondary walls
      • They have a large central vacuole




                 Fig 4.3 Diagram of General Parenchyma cells
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Functions
      • Perform most of the metabolic functions of the plants.
         e.g. synthesis of various organic products
       • Storage-
          e.g. some cells in root and stems contain plastids (leucoplasts) which
          store starch.
       • Most of the parenchyma cells retain the ability to divide and differentiate under
         suitable conditions. This ability is important in wound repair. These abilities also
         make it possible to multiply and differentiate cells even from a single parenchyma
         cell in tissue culture practices.


    Collenchyma cells
      • They are generally elongated
       • They have thicker primary walls than parenchyma cells
       • Their walls are unevenly thickened
       • Young stems and petioles often have strands of collenchyma cells just below the
         epidermis
       • Even at functional maturity they are living, ﬂexible and elongating with stems
         and leaves they support
    Functions
      • Give mechanical support to leaves and stems without restraining growth




                Fig 4.4 Diagram of general collenchyma cells
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book

   Sclerenchyma cells
   • Secondary cell walls are produced after cell elongation
   • They have secondary cell walls thickened by large amount of lignin
   • They are dead cells at maturity
   There are two types of sclerenchyma cells;
   1. sclereids
   2. ﬁbers
   Sclereids are shorter and wider than ﬁbers and irregular in shape. They have very thick
   ligniﬁed secondary cell walls. They are found in places where growth has stopped e.g.
   nut shells, seed coats and ﬂesh of coarse fruit.
   Fibers are usually grouped in strands. They are long, slender and tapered. Used
   commercially to obtain ﬁbers. e.g: coconut husk ﬁber, hemp ﬁbers


   Functions
   Sclereids and ﬁbers are specialized to provide support and strength.




                          Fig 4.5 : Diagram of T.s of sclereids


Vascular tissues- Xylem and phloem
  Xylem tissue
     • It consists of vessel elements, tracheids, ﬁbers and parenchyma cells in
        angiosperms and some of the gymnosperms.
      • Vessel elements and tracheids mainly conduct water.
      • They are dead at functional maturity.
      • Fibers give mechanical strength.
      • Parenchyma functions in storage and in radial transportation.
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    Vessel elements
      • In all angiosperms and some gymnosperms, contain vessel elements
       • They are cylindrical and long.
       • They are wider, shorter and have thinner walls than tracheids
       • Secondary walls are thickened by lignin
       • They provide support to prevent collapse under tension of water transport
       • Perforation plates are present at end walls of vessel elements. Other walls are
         interrupted by pits
       • They form xylem vessel by aligning end to end with perforation plates
       • Water ﬂows freely through perforation plates
    Tracheids
      • Found in all vascular plants
       • Long, thin cells with tapering ends
       • Secondary walls are thickened with lignin and often interrupted by pits
       • Water moves from end to end through pits
       • Thickening by lignin provides support to prevent collapse under water transport




                                           Vessel element with
                                           Perforation plate                    Tracheids


                Fig 4.6 Diagram of L.S of vessel elemetmt amd tracheids
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                Resource Book
   Phloem tissue
     • It consist of sieve tube elements, companion cells, parenchyma cells and ﬁbers
        in angiosperms
      • Except ﬁbers other phloem cells are living cells
      • In seedless vascular plants and gymnosperms sieve tube elements and companion
        cells are absent. Instead of sieve tube elements, long narrow cells called sieve
        cells are present in these plants.
   Sieve tube elements
      • Sieve tube elements lack nucleus, ribosomes, a distinct vacuole, and cytoskeletal
         elements-
      • cytoplasm reduced into a thin peripheral layer.
      • Absence of these allow passing of nutrients more freely
      • Chains of sieve tube elements are aligned to form sieve tubes
      • The end walls between sieve tube elements contain porous plate called sieve
        plate.
      • Sieve plate allows movement of ﬂuid from one sieve element to the next.
   Companion cells
     • They are non-conducting cells.
      • Found alongside in each sieve tube element and connects with sieve tube element
        by numerous plasmodesmata
      • Nucleus and ribosomes of these cells also serve to adjacent sieve tube element
      • Some companion cells in leaves help in phloem loading and in other organs
        unloading




                 Fig -4.7 Longitiudinal view of sieve tube elements and companion cells
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

 Growth and development process of a plant

    Plant growth
    Growth involves irreversible increase of dry mass associated with the development
    of an organism. Often it is associated with increase of cell number as a result of
    producing more cells from the meristem accompanied by cell elongation.
    Plants continue growth throughout the life known as indeterminate growth.


    Primary structure root
    Apart of the distribution pattern of xylem and phloem tissue structures of both monocot
    and dicot roots are more or less similar.




                Fig- 4.8 Primary structure of typical Dicot and Primary structure of typical
                monocot root


       • Outermost cell layer is epidermis. Cells have unicellular outgrowths called root
         hairs. Epidermis protects inner parts while root hairs involve in the absorption
         of water and minerals.
       • Between epidermis and vascular cylinder there is a ground tissue known as
         cortex which is made up of mostly parenchyma cells with intercellular spaces.
       • Cortex mainly stores carbohydrates, and also ransports water and minerals
         towards the endodermis.
       • Innermost single cell layer of the cortex is the endodermis.
       • Endodermis contains a suberin belt called casparian strip and no inter-cellular
         spaces. Therefore, it blocks cortical apoplast from the vascular apoplast.
       • Interior to endodermis there is a pericycle containing two or three parenchyma
         cell layers. These cells in dicot roots have meristematic function and involve in
         the formation of lateral roots and secondary growth of the root.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                   Resource Book

      • Inner to pericycle there is vascular tissues as a solid core. Xylem can be found
        in the middle and it is star shaped in a cross section of a dicot root. Phloem is
        located in the groove between the arms of xylem.
      • In monocot roots, vascular tissue consists of a central core of parenchyma cells
        surrounded by a ring of alternating xylem and phloem. Pericycle in monocot
        roots is not meristematic
   Primary structure of dicotyledonous plant stem :




                 Fig 4.9 Primary structure of T.S of dictolyledonous plant stem
      • The outermost epidermal cell layer protects inner parts from desiccation and
        infections. The epidermis is interrupted by pores called stomata.
      • Interior to epidermis is cortex mostly containing parenchyma cells.
      • Collenchyma cells may also be present just beneath the epidermis to provide
        strength.
      • Sclerenchyma such as ﬁbers are also present in the cortex to provide additional
        support.
      • Vascular bundles arranged as a ring. Vascular bundle contains primary phloem
        towards cortex primary xylem towards pith and in-between a cambium tissue.
      • Outside vascular bundle, there is a cluster of sclerenchyma cell.
      • Inner to vascular bundles large pith which is also made up of parenchyma cells
        can be found.
      • Lateral shoots develop from axillary buds
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    Primary structure of the monocotyledonous stem:




                Fig :4.10 Primary structue of cross section of typical monocot stem


       • Ground tissue of monocot shoot is not differentiated into cortex and pith
       • The vascular bundles are scattered throughout the ground tissue in most monocot
         stems.
       • Each vascular bundle is surrounded by sclerenchyma. It consists of a xylem
         tissue and a phloem tissue but no cambium inbetween xylem and phloem.


    Secondary growth :
      • Increase in the diameter of stems and roots in plants due to the new cells produced
         by lateral meristems is called secondary growth.
       • This occurs in stems and roots of woody perennial plants including, all
         gymnosperms species and many dicot species.
       • Lateral meristems, namely vascular cambium and cork cambium produce cells
         and tissues in the secondary growth.
       • The vascular cambium adds secondary xylem (wood) towards primary xylem
         and secondary phloem towards primary phloem, increasing vascular ﬂow and
         support for the shoots.
       • The cork cambium produces tough thick covering consisting mainly of wax
         impregnated cells that protect the stem from water loss and from invasion of
         insects, bacteria and fungi.
       • In woody plants, primary growth and secondary growth occur simultaneously.
         As the primary growth adds new cells and lengthens stems and roots in the
         younger regions of a plant, secondary growth increases the diameter of stems
         and roots inolder regions where. primary growth has ceased.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

      • Secondary vascular tissue is produced by the action of vascular cambium.
      • In a typical woody stem, the vascular cambium consists of a continuous cylinder
        of undifferentiated cells of often only a single cell layer in thickness, located
        outside the pith and primary xylem and to the inside of the cortex and primary
        phloem.
      • In a typical woody root, the vascular cambium forms laterally exterior to the
        primary xylem and interior to the primary phloem and pericycle.
      • As these meristematic cells divides they increase circumference of the vascular
        cambium and also add secondary xylem to the inside of the cambium and
        secondary phloem to the outside.
      • Viewed in a cross section, the vascular cambium appears as a ring of initials.
      • Some initials are elongated and are oriented with their long axis parallel to the
        axis of stem or root.
      • They produce cells such as tracheids, vessel elements, parenchyma and ﬁbers of
        the xylem, as well as sieve-tube elements companion cells, phloem ﬁbers and
        phloem parenehyma.
      • The other initials are shorter and oriented perpendicular to the axis of the stem
        or root.
      • They produce vascular rays-mostly parenchyma cells that connect secondary
        xylem and phloem, store carbohydrates and aid in wound repairing.
      • As the secondary growth continues over many years, layers of secondary xylem
        (wood) accumulate.
      • The walls of the secondary xylem cells are heavily ligniﬁed and account for the
        hardness and strength of wood.
      • During early stages of secondary growth, the epidermis pushed outwards, causing
        it to split, dry and falls off the stem or root.
      • It is replaced by two tissues produced by cork cambium, a cylinder of dividing
        cells that arises in the outer layer of cortex in stems and in the outer layer of
        pericycle in the roots.
      • Cork cambium produces cork cells to exterior.
      • Cork cambium and tissues it produces are collectively called periderm
      • As the cork cells mature, they deposit a waxy, hydrophobic material called
        suberin in their walls and they become dead cells.
      • The cork tissues function as a barrier that helps protect the stem or root from
        water loss, physical damages and pathogens.
      • Each cork cambium and the tissues it produces comprise a layer of periderm
        which is impermeable to water and gasses.
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

       • For gaseous exchange small pores are present in the periderm known as lenticels
         which are formed by loosely arranged cork cells. They appear as horizontal slits.
       • Further growth of stem or root breaks the layer of cork cambium and it lacks its
         meristematic activity and its cells become cork cells
       • A new cork cambium is initiated inside which with produce a new layer of
         periderm.
       • As new cells are added, the outer regions of cork will crack and peel off in many
         tree trunks.
       • Due to the tissue layers produced by vascular cambium and cork cambium, girth
         of the stem or root increases in secondary growth.
       • Bark is all tissues out of the vascular cambium (cork is commonly and incorrectly
         referred to as bark). Its main components are secondary phloem and periderm.




                Fig. 4.11- The process of secondary growth of dicot woody plant
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

   Heart Wood and Sap wood:
     • As a woody plant ages, the older layers of secondary xylem no longer transport
        water and minerals.
      • These layers are called heartwood because they are close to the centre of the
        stem or root.
      • The newest outer layers of secondary xylem, still transport xylem sap are known
        as sapwood.
      • The heartwood is generally darker than sapwood because of resins and other
        compounds that permeate the cell cavities and help protect the core of the tree
        from fungi and wood-boring insects.
      • Only the young secondary phloem functions in phloem translocation and old
        secondary phloem is sloughed off.


   Hard wood and soft wood
     • Hard wood is the secondary xylem of dicot angiosperms while wood of
       gymnosperms are named soft wood
      • Xylem vessels are absent in soft wood


   Growth rings:
     • The thickness of secondary xylem and the lumen of vessels are larger in periods
       of warm and wet seasons compared to other growth season of the year. These
       differences are visible in a cross section as lighter and darker rings. These are
       referred as growth rings.
      • In temperate regions, wood that develops early in spring is known as spring
        wood. This xylem tissue consists of xylem vessels with large lumens and thin
        walls. This structure maximizes delivery of water to new leaves.
      • The wood produced during rest of the growing season is called summer wood.
        These xylem tissues consist of xylem vessels with thick walls and small lumen,
        do not transport much water but provide more support.
      • These two woods collectively known as an annual ring. A year’s growth appears
        as distinct ring in the cross section of most tree trunks and roots. Therefore
        age of the tree can be estimated by counting annual rings in trees growing in
        temperate regions.


Shoot, architecture and light capture
      • Length of the stem and branching pattern are designed to capture maximum
        light.
      • Plants grow tall to avoid shading from neighboring plants.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    Stem
       • Most tall plants have thick stem with strong mechanical support.
       • Woody plants undergo secondary growth thereby make their tall stem stronger.
       • Vines rely on other objects to reach higher levels to capture more light.
    Branching pattern
      • There is a variety in branching pattern.
       • Some plants are unbranched and still others are well branched.
       • This variation in branching pattern enables the plant to absorb maximum light in
         the ecological niche it occupies.


    Leaves
    Leaf size
      • Size of the leaf vary, based on the place where the plant grows.
       • Largest leaves are found in plants growing in rain forests.
       • Smallest leaves are found in plant species inhabiting dry or very cold environments.
    Phyllotaxy
      • This is the arrangement of leaves on the stem.
       • The arrangement may be one leaf, two leaves or several leaves per node.
       • Phyllotaxy helps the plant to capture maximum sunlight.
    Leaf orientation
      • Leaves may be horizontally oriented.
       • They capture light efﬁciently in low light conditions.
       • Some plants have vertically arranged leaves. e.g. Grasses
       • This is to avoid the possible damage caused by exposure of leaf to the over
         intense light. When leaves are nearly vertical, light rays are parallel to the leaf
         surfaces, so no leaves receive too much of light.


Process of Gaseous Exchange in Plants

    Anatomy of typical dicot and monocot leaves

    In most vascular plants, leaves are the main photosynthetic organs. The exchange of
    gases occurs through stomata in the upper and lower epidermis. Epidermis is usually
    a single cell layer. In between the upper and lower epidermis, there is a ground
    tissue called the mesophyll. This tissue consists of parenchyma cells, specialized for
    photosynthesis.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book
In dicot leaves, stomata are, mainly found in the lower epidermis. The mesophyll
consists of two distinct layers called palisade and spongy. Palisade mesophyll consists
of elongated cells that are arranged in one or more layers. This can be found in the
upper part of the leaf, just beneath the upper epidermis.
The spongy mesophyll can be found between the palisade layer and lower epidermis.
They are loosely arranged with many air spaces. Spongy mesophyll cells have less
chloroplasts than in palisade mesophyll cells.


The vascular tissue of the leaf is continuous with vascular tissue of the stem. Veins
in the leaf is highly branched (net like venation) in the mesophyll layer. Each vein is
protected by a bundle sheath layer.


In monocot leaves, stomata are present in both lower and upper epidermis. Mesophyll
is not differentiated into palisade and spongy layers. Chloroplasts are abundant in all
mesophyll cells. Veins are parallelly arranged (parallel venation).




             Fig. 4.12 T.S of typical Dicot Leaf
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                Fig 4.13 T.S of typical Monocot Leaf


    Structure of Stomata

    Stomata are pores surrounded by guard cells in the epidermis of the leaves and stems
    of plants which can open and close. Guard cells are modiﬁed epidermal cells which
    have a distinct shape and are the only epidermal cells that contain chloroplasts. Guard
    cells are typically bean shaped in angiosperms. The guard cell walls are unevenly
    thickened. The inner cellulose wall is thicker and less elastic than the outer wall. Some
    of the cellulose microﬁbrils are radially arranged to form inelastic hoops around guard
    cells.
    Guard cells regulate the diameter of the stomata by changing shape, widening or
    narrowing the gap between the pair of guard cells.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book




                  Fig - 4.14   Structure of the stomata
   Gaseous exchange
   Gaseous exchange is the exchange of gases between the cells of the organism and
   the environment. In plants gaseous exchange is possible via stomata and lenticels. In
   addition to these a small amount of gases can be exchanged via cuticle. There is no
   special system within plants for the transport of O2 and CO2.These gases move entirely
   by diffusion.
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Mechanism of opening and closing of stomata
    Stomatal opening and closing depends on changes in turgor of the guard cells. If water
    ﬂows into the cells by osmosis their turgor increases, and they expand, but they do not
    expand uniformly in all directions. The relatively inelastic inner walls make them bend
    and draw away from each other. The result is that the pore opens. If the guard cells
    lose water, the reverse happens- their turgor decreases, and their inner walls become
    straighter thus closing the pore.
    The K+ inﬂux hypothesis explains the mechanism.
    K+ inﬂux hypothesis
    During the day time, the guard cells actively accumulate K+ from neighboring
    epidermal cells, thus lowering their water potential that leads to the inﬂow of water by
    osmosis from the surrounding epidermal cells. As a result the turgor pressure in guard
    cells increase, opening stomata.
    The accumulation of K+ in the guard cells requires the energy which is provided by the
    transfer of electrons during photosynthesis of the chloroplast in guard cells.
    Stomatal closing occurs by loss of K+ from guard cells to neighbouring epidermal
    cells. It leads to exosmosis of water from guard cells. As a result the turgor pressure in
    guard cells decrease, closing stomata.
    Abscisic acid (ABA) also plays a role in K+ inﬂux mechanism


    Role of ABA in stomatal closure in drought
      • ABA is produced in roots and leaves in response to water deﬁciency.
       • Production of ABA leads to close the stomata by removal of K+in guard cells.
       • This prevents the wilting of the plant.


    Factors affecting stomatal action
      • Stomata open during day and mostly closed at night. Light stimulates accumulation
         of K+ in guard cells.
       • Decrease in CO2 concentration in substomatal cavity lead to open stomata
       • Internal clock in the guard cells controlling their daily rhythm of opening and
         closing of stomata.
       • Environmental stresses such as drought, high temperature and wind can cause
         stomata to close during the day time.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
Acquisition of water and minerals

Need for transport
  As land plants evolved and increased in number, competition for light, water and
  nutrients also increased. As a result, the size and complexity of plant body increased.
  Therefore the simple ways of transportation of water and material became inadequate
  leading to the evolution of vascular tissues, consisting of xylem and phloem to carryout
  long distance transport in plants.
   e.g. the xylem transports water and minerals from roots to shoots.
        the phloem transports products of photosynthesis from where they are made or
   stored to where they are needed.
   Methods of water and solutes movement
   Both active and passive transport mechanisms occur in plants
   • Active transport
   • Passive transport
      •    Diffusion
      • Osmosis
      • Imbibitions
      • Facilitated diffusion
      • Bulk ﬂow- long distance
   Passive transport occurs spontaneously, and it does not require metabolic energy (ATP).
   Movement of some materials across membranes takes place using ATP and that process
   is called an active transport.


   Diffusion
   Molecules have an energy called thermal energy, due to their constant motion. One
   result of this motion is diffusion.
   In the absence of other forces, the movement of molecules of a substance from a place
   where it is more concentrated to place where it is less concentrated, due to random
   motion of molecules is called diffusion.
   The motion of a molecule is random, but movement of a population of molecules by
   diffusion is directional.
   Therefore, diffusion takes place according to a concentration gradient, spontaneously
   and not using metabolic energy (ATP).
   Diffusion takes place across the membrane also, if the membrane is permeable to those
   molecules.
   e.g. Water and soluble materials can diffuse through the cellulose cell wall
          O2 and CO2 can diffuse through the plasma membrane
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    Osmosis
    Osmosis is a special type of diffusion. The diffusion of free water molecules across a
    selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis.
    Free water is water molecules that are not bound to solutes or surfaces.


    Imbibition
    The physical adsorption of water molecules by hydrophilic materials is called
    imbibition.
    e.g. adsorption of water molecules by the cellulose cell walls.


    Facilitated diffusion
    Movement of water and hydrophilic solutes across the membranes passively with the
    help of transport protein that span the membrane is called facilitated diffusion.
    Transport proteins are very speciﬁc. They transport some substances but not the
    others. This movement also takes place along concentration gradient and it is a passive
    movement.




                Fig 4.15 -The process of as facilitated morcment


    Bulk ﬂow
    Bulk ﬂow is the movement of liquid and the materials (entire solution) in response to
    pressure gradient. Always the bulk ﬂow transports materials from higher pressure to
    lower pressure region.
    It is a long-distance transport method. This ﬂow does not occur through the membranes
    and occurs at much greater speed than diffusion. This method of transport is independent
    of solute concentration gradient.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   Concept of water potential
   The physical property that predicts the direction in which water will ﬂow governed by
   solute concentration and applied pressure is called water potential. Water potential is
   related to potential energy of water molecules.
   Any system that contains water has a water potential. Free water moves from regions
   of higher water potential to regions of lower water potential, if there is no barrier to
   its ﬂow.
   Water potential is denoted by Ψ. Ψ is measured in a unit of megapascal (MPa). Arbitrary
   the Ψ of pure water in a container open to the atmosphere under standard conditions (at
   sea level and room temperature) is 0 MPa.
   Both solute concentration and physical pressure can affect water potential; as expressed
   in the water potential equation.
   Ψ =Ψs + Ψp
   Ψ= water potential
   Ψs= solute potential
   Ψp= pressure potential


   Solute potential
   Solute potential (Ψs) is directly proportional to the molarity of a solution. (Ψs is also
   called osmotic potential. Solutes affect the direction of osmosis.)
   The solutes in plants are typically mineral ions and sugars.
   Ψ of pure water is 0 MPa.
   When solutes are added, they bind water molecules and reduce free water molecules,
   reducing capacity of the water to move and do work.
   In this way an increase in solutes has a negative effect on water potential. Therefore,
   Ψs of a solution is always expressed as a negative number. As the solute concentration
   increases, Ψs will become more negative.
      e.g: Ψs of the 0.1M sugar solution is -0.23MPa


   Pressure potential
   Pressure potential (Ψp) is the physical pressure on a solution. Ψp can be positive or
   negative relative to atmospheric pressure.
   e.g: Ψp of a xylem vessel is usually less than -2 MPa as xylem vessels are under
   tension (negative pressure)
   Ψp of a living cell is a positive value because living cell is usually under positive
   pressure due to osmotic uptake of water.
   The cell contents press the plasma membrane against the cell wall. Then press against
   the protoplast, producing a pressure called turgor pressure. When turgor pressure
   increases, the Ψ of cell also increases.
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Water potential of a cell
    Cell is a system containing water. Therefore, it has a water potential. The protoplast
    is an aqueous system and it contains solutes. Therefore, it has a solute potential (Ψs)
    which is negative. Because of Ψs, Ψ of the cell is decreased.
    Due to the turgor pressure internal pressure of protoplast increases and increases
    pressure potential (Ψp) of the cell. Because of Ψp, Ψ of cell increased.
    Therefore, water potential (Ψ) of a cell is given by the following equation.
    Ψ= Ψs +Ψp


    Entry of water into vacuolated cell across the cell membrane
    If a cell is placed in a solution, direction of water movement depends on the water
    potential of external solution and protoplast.
    Take a fully ﬂaccid cell; (as a result of water losing)
    The Ψp of that cell is 0;
    Ψp= 0 ;Ψs= Ψ
    Ψs of pure water is 0 and addition of solutes will increase the negative value of Ψs or
    become more negative. Suppose this ﬂaccid cell is placed in a solution of higher solute
    concentration (more negative solute potential) than the cell itself, since the external
    solution has a lower (more negative) water potential, water diffuse out of the cell. The
    protoplast of the cell shrinks and pulls away from the cell wall. This process is known
    as plasmolysis.
    Suppose this ﬂaccid cell is placed in pure water (Ψ=0 MPa). The cell has a lower water
    potential than the pure water as it contains solutes. Therefore, water enters the cell by
    osmosis. Then the protoplast of the cell begins to swell and press the plasma membrane
    against the cell wall. The partially elastic cell, exerting a turgor pressure, contains
    the pressurized protoplast. Therefore, Ψp is increased gradually. The maximum value
    of Ψp= Ψs of the cell. Therefore, Ψ becomes 0. This matches the water potential of
    extracellular environment, 0 Mpa. Then a dynamic equilibrium is formed and there is
    no further net water movement. If the cell has the maximum value for Ψp, (it equal to
    the Ψs of the cell) the cell is said to be in fully turgid state. (fully turgid or fully ﬂaccid
    cells are not found in nature).
    Therefore, if non-woody tissue is placed in a solution with higher water potential, it
    is stiffened and is very rigid. Therefore, turgor pressure helps support of non woody
    plants. Turgor pressure is also important in cell elongation. Loss of turgor results in
    wilting, a condition where leaves and stem droop.


    Movement of water and minerals from soil solution to plant root
    The cells near the root tips of the roots are important because most of the absorption
    of water and minerals occurs there. In this region, the epidermal cells are permeable
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   to water and many are differentiated to root hairs. Root hairs account for much of the
   absorption of water by roots, due to increase in surface area.
   The root hairs absorb the soil solution, which consists of water molecules and
   dissolved mineral ions that are not bound tightly to soil particles. This absorption takes
   place across the plasma membrane. Water can enter root hair by osmosis, a passive
   movement along the concentration gradient.
   But in the root hairs concentration of mineral ions is greater than that of soil solution.
   K+ concentration in the root hair is hundreds of time greater than in the soil solution.
   Therefore, mineral ions transport occurs against concentration gradient, by an active
   transport.
   The soil solution is also absorbed into hydrophilic walls of the epidermal cells and
   passes freely along the cell walls and the extracellular spaces into the root cortex.


   Radial transport
   Transport of water and minerals entered from soil to root cortex into the xylem of the
   root is known as radial transport.
   The endodermis, the innermost layer of cells in the cortex, functions as the last check
   point for selective passage of the minerals from the cortex into the vascular cylinder.
   All materials which enters root through cell walls and extracellular spaces should
   cross the membranes of endodermis. Therefore, unwanted materials can be selectively
   excluded.
   Three routes are used in the radial transport. They are:
   1. apoplastic route
   2. symplastic route
   3. transmembrane route


   Apoplastic route
   The apoplastic route consists of everything external to the plasma membrane of living
   cells and includes cell walls, extracellular spaces and the interior of dead cells such as
   vessel elements and tracheids.
   Water and solutes move along continuum of the cell walls and extracellular spaces and
   it is known as apoplastic route.
   Uptake of soil solution by the hydrophilic walls of root hairs provides access to the
   apoplast. Water and minerals then can diffuse into cortex along this matrix of walls and
   extracellular spaces.
   Endodermis blocks apoplastic route by a barrier located in the transverse and radial
   walls of endodermal cells, called the casparian strips. It is a belt made of suberin which
   is impervious to water and mineral salts. Thus water and minerals cannot cross the
   endodermis and enter the vascular cylinder via apoplast. Therefore, water and minerals
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    cross the selectively permeable plasma membrane before entering the vascular tissue
    and keep unneeded and toxic materials out.
    The endodermis also prevents solutes that have accumulated in the xylem from leaking
    back into the soil solution.

    Symplastic route
    The symplast consists of the entire mass of cytosol of all living cells in a plant, as well
    as plasmodesmata, the cytoplasmic channels that interconnect them.
    In the symplastic route, water and solutes move along the continuum of cytosol. This
    route requires substance to cross a plasma membrane once, when they ﬁrst enter the
    plant. After entering one cell, substances can move from cell to cell via plasmodesmata.


    Transmembrane route
    The transmembrane route requires repeated crossing of plasma membranes as water
    and solutes exit one cell and enter the next.
    As the soil solution moves along the apoplast, some water and minerals are transported
    into the protoplast of the cells of the epidermis and cortex and then move via the
    symplast.
    Some substances can use more than one route. The least resistence for the transport is
    found in apoplastic route. Therefore, more water use apoplastic route.
    Finally, water and minerals enter into the tracheids and vessel elements of xylem. These
    waters conducting cells lack protoplasts when mature and therefore they are parts of the
    apoplast. Endodermal cells and living cells of the vascular tissues discharge minerals
    from their protoplast to their own cell walls. Both diffusion and active transport involve
    in transport of solutes from symplast to apoplast. Then water and minerals can enter
    the tracheids and vessel elements to the transport to shoot system by bulk ﬂow only
    through the apoplast.


    Upward movement of water and minerals in a plant
    Water and minerals which enter to vascular cylinder are transported to upper parts of
    the plant and this transport is known as ascent of xylem sap.
    Xylem sap, the water and dissolved minerals in the xylem, gets transported by bulk
    ﬂow, which is much faster than diffusion.
    To explain the process involved in the ascent of xylem sap, cohesion-tension hypothesis
    is put forward. According to this hypothesis, transpiration provides pull for the ascent
    of xylem sap and cohesion of water molecules transmits this pull along the entire
    length of xylem from shoots to roots. Hence xylem sap is normally under tension
    (negative pressure).
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
   The negative pressure potential helps water to move up through xylem and water
   moves according to the water potential gradient.
   Adhesion and cohesion facilitate transport water by bulk ﬂow. Due to high adhesion
   water molecules are attracted to cellulose molecules in the xylem walls. Cohesion of
   water molecules is unusually high due to hydrogen bonds among water molecules.
   Therefore, a continuous water column is formed within xylem vessels and tracheids.
   Transpiration pull can extend down to the root only through an unbroken chain of
   water.
   As water evaporates from the mesophyll cells, water potential of mesophyll reduces,
   and water moves from cells of petioles to the mesophyll cells. It reduces the water
   potential of cells of petioles. then water pulls upward due to this transpiration pull.
   The xylem sap is driven by difference in pressure potential. Therefore, the water
   potential gradient within xylem is essentially a pressure gradient.
   The tensile force on xylem sap is transmitted all the way from the leaves to the root tips
   and even into the soil. Therefore, water potential gradient between the soil solution and
   atmosphere through the plant body also help ascent of xylem sap, against the gravity.
   The plants do not need energy to lift the xylem sap.


   Mechanism of mineral absorption into root
   Mineral ions are absorbed by the plant roots mainly from the soil solution. Epidermal
   cells are permeable to water and many epidermal cells are modiﬁed to form root hairs.
   Root hair cells are unicellular structures which absorb dissolved mineral ions from the
   soil solution. Soil solution has a lower concentration of ions than that of the cell sap
   of root hair cells. Therefore, absorption takes place against a concentration gradient.


The process involved in transport of material in phloem
Basic characteristics of phloem transport
  The transport of the product of photosynthesis is carried out by the phloem tissue,
  known as phloem translocation.
   In angiosperms, the sieve-tube elements of the phloem are specialized cells for
   translocation.
   Phloem sap, the aqueous solution that ﬂows through sieve tubes differs from xylem
   sap mainly because it contains sucrose (as 30% by weight) and it may also contain
   amino acids, hormones and minerals.
   Phloem sap moves from sites of sugar production to site of sugar use or storage.
   Therefore, it takes place from sugar source to a sugar sink.
   Sugar source is an organ that is a net producer of sugar, by photosynthesis or by
   breakdown of starch.
   Plant leaves are sources whereas growing roots, stems, buds and fruits are sinks.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Storage organs such as tubers and bulbs, may be a source or a sink, depending on its
    function.

    Mechanism of phloem translocation
    Sinks usually receive sugar from the nearest sugar sources. For each sieve tube, the
    direction of transport depends on the locations of the sugar source and sugar sink
    that are connected by that tube. Therefore, neighbouring sieve tubes may carry sap in
    opposite directions if they originate and end in different locations.
    The ﬁrst step in translocation of sugar is to transport or load into sieve tube elements.
    In some species, it moves from mesophyll cells to sieve tube elements via symplast,
    passing through plasmodesmata.
    In many plants, sugar movements into phloem requires active transport because sucrose
    is more concentrated in sieve tube element and companion cells than mesophyll cells.


    Sucrose is unloaded at the sink end of the sieve tube. The process varies by species
    and organ. However, the concentration of free sugar in sink is always lower than in
    the sieve tube because the unloaded sugar is consumed during growth and metabolism
    of cells of sinks or converted to insoluble polymers such as starch. As a result of
    concentration gradient, sugar molecules diffuse from phloem into the sink and water
    follows by osmosis.


    Phloem sap moves from source to sink at a rate about 1m/hr and it moves by bulk ﬂow
    driven by positive pressure, known as pressure ﬂow.
    Phloem translocation of angiosperms is explained by pressure ﬂow hypothesis. In this
    translocation, following processes take place.
    1. Loading of sugar into the sieve tube reduces water potential inside the sieve tube
       elements at the source
    2. This causes the sieve tube to take up water from the xylem by osmosis.
    3. This uptake of water generates a positive pressure that forces the sap to ﬂow along
       the tube
    4. The pressure is reduced by unloading of sugar and consequent loss of water from
       phloem to the xylem at the sink
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book




                 Fig 4.16 : The Process phloem transportation


Process of water loss in plants
Transpiration
  Removal of water from leaves and other aerial parts of the plant body as water vapour
  by diffusion is known as transpiration.
   This water loss takes place in plants mainly;
    through stomata.-stomatal transpiration
   upto some extent through cuticle-cuticular transpiration
   and through lenticels- lenticular transpiration.
   About 95% of water in plants is lost through stomatal transpiration.
   In the day time, air in the intercellular air spaces is saturated with water vapour because
   they are in contact with the moist cell walls. Normally air outside the plant is drier than
   inside. Hence water potential of outside air is lower than that of inside. Therefore
   water vapour in the air spaces of the plant diffuses down its water potential gradient
   and exits the plant.


   Stomatal Transpiration
   Water is brought to the leaf in the xylem of vascular bundle and subsequently spread
   from a ﬁne branching network throughout the leaf. These branches end in one or
   few xylem vessels or tracheids possessing little ligniﬁcation. Therefore water can
   release easily through their cellulose walls to mesophyll cells. Water moves through
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    the mesophyll cells by apoplast, symplast and transmembrane pathways according to
    water potential gradient.
    Then water evaporate from the wet walls of the mesophyll cells into the intercellular
    air spaces particularly into the large substomatal air spaces. From here water vapour
    diffuses through the stomata to the atmosphere.
    Immediately next to the leaf is a thin layer of stationary air through which water vapour
    diffuses out and swept away by moving air.


    There is a diffusion gradient from the stationary layer back to the mesophyll cells.
    Each stomata has a diffusion gradient or diffusion shell around it. The diffusion shell
    of neighbouring stomata overlap in still air to form one overall diffusion shell (Layer).
    Thickness of the diffusion shell depends on the surface features of the leaf and wind
    speed.


    Factors affecting the rate of transpiration
    1. Light intensity
    2. Temperature
    3. Humidity
    4. Wind speed
    5. Concentration of CO2
    6. Available water in soil


    Light intensity
    Stomata usually open in the light and close in darkness. With the increase of light
    intensity the rate of transpiration increases.


    Temperature
    In the presence of light, the external factor which has the greatest effect on transpiration
    is temperature. The higher the temperature, the greater the rate of evaporation of water
    from mesophyll cells which result the greater saturation of the leaf atmosphere with
    water vapour. At the same time, a rise in temperature lowers the relative humidity of
    the air outside the leaf. Both events result in a steeper concentration gradient of water
    molecules from leaf to external atmosphere. The steeper this gradient is the faster the
    rate of diffusion.


    Humidity
    Low humidity outside environment of the leaf increases transpiration, because it
    makes the diffusion gradient of water vapour from the moist leaf atmosphere to drier
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book
   external atmosphere. As the concentration of water vapour in the external atmosphere
   is high when humidity rises, the diffusion gradient becomes less steep result in lower
   transpiration.
   Wind speed
   In still air, a shell of highly saturated air builds up around the leaf thus reducing the
   steepness of the diffusion gradient between leaf atmosphere and external atmosphere
   which makes the transpiration rate low.
   In windy condition, ﬂow of air will generally sweep away the shell. Therefore, windy
   condition increases transpiration rate.
   Availability of soil water
   As soil dries out, water usually binds more tightly to soil particles reducing the amount
   of available water. The soil solution becomes more concentrated and its water potential
   decreases. Therefore, tendency for water to enter by osmosis is lower. This reduces
   water uptake by plants and as a result transpiration rate is also reduced. There is greater
   resistance to movement of water through the plant due to less steep water potential
   gradient from the soil through the plant to the atmosphere.


   Signiﬁcance of transpiration to plants
   1. Distribute minerals and water throughout the plant.
   2. Ascent of water in the xylem.
   3. Uptake of water and minerals by roots from the soil solution.


   Root pressure and guttation
   At night, when the relative humidity is high approaching 100%, transpiration rate is
   very low or zero. Root cells continuously pump water and mineral ions into xylem
   tissue. The endodermis prevents ions from leaking back into the cortex and soil.
   Therefore more mineral ions accumulate in the vascular cylinder and reduce water
   potential. Therefore water moves from the cortex. It generates a root pressure and
   upward push of xylem sap.


   Due to root pressure, more water enters to the leaves than lost by transpiration. This
   results in removal of water droplets from leaf tips or leaf margins of some herbaceous
   plants. That process is known as guttation. Guttation ﬂuid differs from dew, which is
   condensed moisture of the atmosphere.


   Many plants do not generate any root pressure and therefore there is no guttation.
   Even in plants that display guttation, root pressure cannot match the water loss by
   transpiration after sun rise and therefore no guttation is seen in the day time, because
   then xylem sap is not pushed but pulled upward by transpiration.
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Root pressure is never sufﬁcient to push water up distance over meters. Guttation takes
    place through the hydathode which are formed by special groups of cells located near
    the ends of small veins and does not take place through the stomata.
    e.g. Alocasia,      Colocasia




                Fig 4,17: The general structure of the hydathode


Diversity of nutritional processes in plants

    Nutrition is the process of acquiring raw materials and energy from the environment
    for the metabolic activities of organisms.
    Plants require nutrients for their growth, development and reproduction.


Modes of nutrition in plants
    Autotrophic nutrition (autotrophism)
    The organisms who exhibit autotrophism are referred to as autotrophs. Autotrophs
    synthesize organic materials from CO2 and inorganic materials.
    Plants are photoautotrophs which utilizes light energy in order to synthesize organic
    molecules from inorganic material.


    • Symbiosis
    Symbiosis is an ecological relationship in which two species live in close contact with
    each other. There are three types; they are mutualism, parasitism, and commensalism.

    • Mutualism
    A symbiotic relationship in which both participants are beneﬁted.
    e.g: legume root nodules with nitrogen ﬁxing bacteria (Rhizobium)
    mycorrhizae- symbiotic association of roots of higher plants with fungi
    corolloid root of Cycas with Anabaena
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book
   • Commensalism
   It is an interaction between two species in which beneﬁts one of the species and neither
   harm nor beneﬁts the other.
   e.g: epiphytic orchids


   • Parasitism
   It is a close association between two different species which is beneﬁcial to one (the
   parasite) and harmful to the other (the host).
     e.g. semi parasitic–Loranthus and host plant
   parasitic - Cuscuta (Dodder plant) and host plants


   • Special mode of nutrition
   Carnivorous plants
   These plants are photosynthetic but obtain nitrogen and minerals by killing and
   digesting insects and other small animals. They live in habitats where the soil is poor
   in nitrogen and other minerals.
   e.g : Nepenthes, Drosera , Utricularia


Nutritional requirements for the optimal growth of plants
   Essential elements: Elements which are required for a plant to complete its life cycle
   and produce another generation.
   Seventeen essential elements are needed by all plants
   C,O,H,N,P,S,K,Ca, Mg, Cl, Fe, Mn, B, Zn, Cu, Ni, Mo,
   Essential elements are two types
   Macronutrients


   Macronutrients: plants need these elements in large amounts.
   e.g: C,O,H,N,P,S,K,Ca, Mg (9 elements)


   Micronutrients
   Plants require these elements in small amounts.
   e.g: Cl, Fe, Mn, B, Zn, Cu, Ni, Mo
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Table 4.2- Macro elements and their functions and deﬁciency symptoms
     Element      Form/       Source              Function                   Deﬁciency symptoms
                  forms of
                  intake
      C           CO2         Atmospheric air     One of the major           Poor growth
                                                  components of organic
                                                  molecules in plants



        O            CO2      Atmospheric air     Major components of        Poor growth
                              and soil solution   organic molecules in
                                                  plants
        H            H2O      Soil solution       Major components of        Poor growth, wilting
                                                  organic molecules in
                                                  plants
        N            NO3-,    Soil solution       Component of amino         Stunted growth and
                                                  acids, proteins,           strong chlorosis,
                     NH4+
                                                  nucleotides, nucleic       particularly of older
                                                  acids, chlorophyll,        leaves
                                                  coenzymes, enzymes
        K            K+       Soil solution       operation of stomata,      Yellow and brown leaf
                                                  cofactors of many          margins , weak stems,
                                                  enzymes                    poorly developed roots


        Ca           Ca2+     Soil solution       Component of cell walls    Crinkling of young
                                                  and middle lamella,        leaves, death of
                                                  maintenance of             terminal buds
                                                  membrane structure
                                                  and permeability, signal
                                                  transduction


        Mg           Mg2+     Soil solution          Component         Chlorosis between
                                                     of    chlorophyll veins, found in older
                                                                       leaves
                                                     molecule,
                                                     Activates many
                                                     enzymes.

       P          H2PO24-     Soil solution       Component of ATP and       Healthy appearance but
                                                  nucleic                    very slow development,
                                                  acids, phospholipids       thin stems, purpling of
                                                                             veins, poor ﬂowering
                                                                             and fruiting


        S         SO4- 2-     Soil solution       Components of some       Chlorosis in younger
                                                  amino acids and proteins leaves
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                  Resource Book


   Micro elements, their functions and deﬁciency symptoms
         Element    Form/ form           Source          Function              Deﬁciency
                    of intake
                                                                               symptoms


         Cl            Cl-            Soil solution   Osmosis and           Wilting, stubby roots, leaf
                                                      ionic balance, in     mottling (uncommon)
                                                      photosynthesis


         Fe            Fe2+,Fe3+         Soil         Chlorophyll           Chlorosis between veins,
                                                      synthesis in          particularly in young
                                         solution
                                                      photosynthesis, N2    leaves
                                                      ﬁxation


         Zn            Zn2+           Soil solution   Activator of many     Crinkled leaves, reduced
                                                      enzymes and           internode length
                                                      activate formation
                                                      of Chlorophyll,
                                                      need for DNA
                                                      transcription


         B             H2BO3-            Soil         Cofactor in           Death of meristems, thick
                                                      chlorophyll           leathery, and discolored
                                         solution
                                                      synthesis, role in    leaves
                                                      cell wall function,
                                                      pollen tube growth


         Cu            Cu2+       ,      Soil            Activator or          Light green color
                       Cu+               solution        component             throughout young
                                                         of     certain        leaves, with
                                                         enzymes               drying of leaf
                                                                               tips, roots stunted
                                                                               and excessively
                                                                               branched

    Mo              MoO42-            Soil solution   Nitrogen              Death of root and shoot
                                                      metabolism            tips, chlorosis in older
                                                                            leaves
    Ni              Ni2+              Soil solution   Nitrogen              Death of leaf tips,
                                                      metabolism            chlorosis in older leaves

    Mn              Mn2+              Soil solution   Activates some         chlorosis between veins,
                                                      enzyme require in     found in young leaves
                                                      photosynthesis
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


Reproductive process in Plants

Trends in life cycles to relate the adaptations of plants for a terrestrial
life

Sexual reproduction of terrestrial plants
     • The life cycles of all land plants exhibit alternation of generations, which means
        the presence of haploid generation and diploid generation alternatively, with
        each producing the other.
       • The two multicellular body forms that alternate in the life cycles of land plants
         are the haploid gametophyte and diploid sporophyte which are morphologically
         different. Therefore called heteromorphic alternation of generations. Their
         reproductive organs (gametangia and sporangia) are protected by sterile cell
         layers to prevent desiccation of mother cells. (gamete forming cells and spore
         forming cells).
       • Gametophytes produce gametes by mitosis.
       • All land plants carryout internal fertilization to prevent desiccation of gametes.
       • Female egg (ovum) is retained in the archegonium and male gametes
         (antherozoids) are released from the antheridium. Seedless plants depend on
         external water for fertilization, but seed plants do not depend on external water
         for their fertilization.
       • After fertilization, diploid zygote is retained within the gametophyte to produce
         an embryo which is nourished by the gametophyte. Embryo develops into the
         diploid sporophyte.
       • Delay of meiosis after fertilization results in creating a diploid sporophytic
         generation.
       • Diploid sporophyte produces haploid spores by meiosis.
       • Spores grow into haploid gametophytes.
       • In the course of evolution of land plants, diploid sporophytic generation acquire
         adaptations needed for successful colonization on land and become dominant
         plant in the life cycle. Gametophytic generation gradually reduced and has
         become dependent on the sporophytic generation in seed plants.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book



                                     Gametophyte(n)


                                                                              Female
     Haploid spores                                         Male Gametes      Gametes




                meiosis                                                 Fertilization


                            sporophyte
                                                  Diploid
                                                  Zygote


   Life cycle of Pogonatum
      • Gametophyte is the dominant plant, larger and longer-living than sporophyte.
      • Gametophyte is photosynthetic.
      • ‘Stem’, ‘leaves’, and rhizoids are present in the gametophyte
      • Gametophytes are dioecious (unisexual). Mature male gametophytes produce
        antheridia in which several sperms are produced.
      • Female gametophytes produce archegonia. A single egg is produced within the
        archegonium
      • The egg is not released.
      • Flagellated, motile sperm swims through external water towards egg, entering
        the archegonium in response to chemical attractants.
      • Sperm fuses with the ovum resulting diploid zygote. This occurs in the
        archegonium.
      • After fertilization zygote develops into the embryo.
      • The embryo is also retained within the archegonium and develops into the diploid
        sporophyte by obtaining nutrients from the gametophyte.
      • The sporophyte remains attached to the gametophyte.
      • The sporophyte consists of a foot, seta and a capsule (sporangium).
      • The foot absorbs nutrients and water from the gametophyte.
      • The capsule produces spores by meiosis. Homosporous.
      • If spores are dispersed to a favourable habitat, (such as moist soil or tree bark)
        they may germinate and grow into a green, branched ﬁlament called protonema.
      • Protonema produces buds that grow into gametophytes.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Life cycle of Nephrolepis
    • Sporophyte is dominant
    • Gametophyte is reduced and short lived.
    • Both sporophytes and gametophytes are independent and photosynthetic.
    • Sporophytes have more complex structure.
       • Plant body is differentiated into roots, stem and leaves.
       • Cuticle is found on aerial parts of the plant body
       • Stomata are developed on aerial parts for gaseous exchange.
       • Two types of vascular tissues, xylem and phloem are developed
       • They have ﬁddlehead young leaves
       • Stem is an underground rhizome
       • Leaves are compound pinnate leaves
       • Long underground branches called stolons arise from the rhizome \
         which gives rise to new plantlets.
       • Sporangia are developed as clusters called sori on the underside of mature
         leaﬂets. Sori are covered by the indusium, protecting the young sporangia
         from desiccation. Spores are produced in the sporangium by meiosis and are
         homosporous.
    • When the sorus matures, indusium dries up and shrivels, exposing mature sporangia.
    • Under dry environmental conditions sporangium wall ruptures, releasing spores.
    • Spores are dispersed by wind.
    • When spores are dispersed to a favourable habitat they may germinate and grow
      into a gametophyte
    • Gametophyte is a small heart shaped, macroscopic, green coloured photosynthetic
      thallus.
    • Rhizoids develop on the ventral surface.
       • Gametophytes are monoecious (bisexual). Antheridia and archegonia are
         developed on the ventral side.
       • Antheridium produces ﬂagellated sperms and releases them into the external
         environment.
       • Archegonium produces one egg and retains it.
       • Motile sperms swim through external water towards egg entering the archegonium
         in response to chemical attractants.
       • Sperm fuses with the egg resulting the diploid zygote.
       • After fertilization zygote develops into the embryo and then to the young
         sporophyte while retained in the gametophyte.
       • All the developmental stages are nourished by the gametophyte.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book
      •    When the young sporophyte develops its photosynthetic tissues, it becomes an
          independent plant.

   Life cycle of Selaginella
      • Sporophytes are dominant and photosynthetic.
      • Gametophytes are reduced in structure and short-lived, partially depend on the
        sporophyte.
      • Sporophyte plant body is differentiated into roots, stem and leaves. Vascular
        tissues present. Herbaceous.
      • Heterophyllous leaves are arranged as pairs.
      • Stem is dorsiventrally ﬂattened.
      • Sporangia are borne on the specialized leaves called sporophylls.
      • Sporophylls are compactly arranged in a terminal strobilus.
      • Two types of sporophylls called megasporophyll and microsporophyll are
        arranged in the same strobilus.
      • Megasporophyll produces a single megasporngium and microsporophyll
        produces a single microsporangium.
      • Morphologically two different types of spores are produced. This nature is called
        heterospory.
      • Megasporangium produces four large megaspores by meiosis.
      • Microsporangium produces numerous small microspores by meiosis.
      • Both types of spores have thick/tough walls.
      • Microspores are retained in the microsporangium and develop into young male
        gametophytes.
      • Young male gametophytes are enclosed by the wall of microspore which, are
        released by the microsporangium.
      • In the external environment they become mature male gametophytes.
      • Male gametophytes is microscopic, enclosed in the microspore wall, non-
        photosynthetic, depend on stored food.
      • Male gametophytes produce ﬂagellated sperms and release them into the external
        environment.
      • Megaspores are released into the external environment.           In the external
        environment they develop into female gametophytes.
      • Female gametophyte is multicellular, surrounded by the thick wall of megaspore,
        Few rhizoids develop.
      • Photosynthetic, but partially depend on stored food in the megaspore.
      • Archegonia develop at the superﬁcial regions and are fully embedded in the
        gametophytic tissue.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

       • One egg is produced inside the archegonium.
       • Sperm swims towards the egg (n) using ﬂagella through external water, entering
         into the archegonium and fertilizes the egg (n) resulting in a zygote(2n).
       • Zygote develops to form an embryo and then embryo develops to form a young
         sporophyte by obtaining nutrients from the female gametophyte.
       • Sporophyte generation is the larger and more complex form in the alternation of
         generation


    Life cycle of Cycas
       • Sporophytes are the dominant photosynthetic plants in the life cycle, gametophytes
          are reduced and depend on the sporophyte throughout its life.
       • Sporophytes are a perennial tree with roots, stem and leaves.
       • Stem is unbranched columnar and woody.
       • Leaves are arranged in crowns.
       • Compound leaves show xerophytic adaptations and young leaves are ﬁddleheads.
       • Sporophytes are heterosporous and dioecious. Sporophytes have developed a tap
         root system.
       • Secondary growth is present.
       • Sporophytes which produce megaspores are called female plants and those
         which produce microspores are called male plants.
       • Mature female plant produces a crown of megasporophylls.
       • Megasporangium is enclosed in the protective layer called integument to form
         the ovule. Integument has a small pore in the distal end of the ovule called
         micropyle.
       • One of the cells in the megasporangial tissue differentiates into a single
         megaspore mother cell. Megaspore mother cell undergoes meiosis to form four
         haploid megaspores out of which only one remains functional.
       • The remaining megasporangial tissue functions as nucellus which provides
         nourishment.
       • Megaspores are not released to the external environment megaspore develop
         into the female gametophyte (n) while within the ovule. Mature ovule contains
         the female gametophyte. The female gametophyte produces several archegonia.
         Each archegonium produces a single egg cell within it.
       • Mature male plants produce male cones with microsporophylls which consist
         of microsporangia on the lower surface. Large numbers of microspores (n) are
         produced from microspore mother cells (2n) within the microsporangium by
         meiosis.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

      • They develop into pollen grains within the sporangium and then discharge.
      • Pollen grains are dispersed by wind and deposited on the micropyle of a mature
        ovule is called pollination.
      • Pollen grains enter into pollen chamber of the ovule through the micropyle.
        In the pollen chamber, pollen grains develop into male gametophytes. Male
        gametophyte consists of a branched pollen tube which involves in absorption of
        nutrients from the nucellus. Male gametophyte is short-lived.
      • Produce two large sperms with a spiral band of numerous cilia.
      • The basal end of the pollen tube ruptures releasing sperms into the archegonial
        chamber of the ovule. Sperms swim through the liquid medium and fertilize the
        egg resulting the 2n zygote.
      • Zygote develops into the embryo
      • Remaining female gametophyte becomes the endosperm which providesnutrients
        for the developing embryo during seed germination. Integument becomes the
        seed coat.
      • The ovule becomes the seed.
      • Seed is the dispersal unit which contains the embryo and stored food that are
        enclosed in the seed coat.
      • Seeds are dispersed and under favorable environmental conditions seeds
        germinate producing the seedlings (young Sporophyte).


structures and functions associated with sexual reproduction in
ﬂowering plants

   Life cycle of ﬂowering plants
      • Sporophyte is the dominant plant. Gametophytes are short-lived, microscopic,
         entirely depend on the sporophyte.
      • Sporophyte produces the reproductive structures called ﬂowers.
      • A ﬂower is a specialized shoot with four whorls of modiﬁed leaves named sepals,
        petals, stamens and carpels.
      • Sepals are usually green, enclose and protect the ﬂower before it opens.
      • Petals are brightly coloured in most ﬂowers and aid in attracting pollinators. (But
        wind pollinated ﬂowers generally lack brightly coloured parts).
      • The sepals and petals are sterile ﬂoral organs. They do not directly involve in
        reproduction.
      • Stamens are the microsporophylls.
      • The stamen consists of a stalk called ﬁlament and two terminal lobes called
        anther.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
       •




                4.16 Structure of a typical angiosperm ﬂower


       • Anther is made up of microsporangia (pollen sacs) containing microspore mother
         cells which produce microspores by meiosis. Microspores develop into pollen
         grains within the anther.
       • A pollen grain contains two nuclei, the tube nucleus and generative nucleus.
       • Carpels are the megasporophylls. At the tip of the carpel is a sticky stigma that
         receives pollens. The swollen base of the carpel forms the ovary. Ovary contains
         one or more ovules A long, slender neck called style connects ovary with stigma.
       • Ovule produces four megaspores by meiosis of which only one becomes
         functional.
       • Functional megaspore develops into the female gametophyte called the embryo
         sac. It is a highly reduced microscopic structure.
       • The mature embryo sac consists of eight nuclei contained within seven cells-
         three antipodal cells, two polar nuclei in the central cell, two synergids and one
         egg.
       • Transfer of pollen grains to a mature stigma is known as pollination.
       • In some plant species, pollen grains are transferred from an anther of a ﬂower on
         to the stigma of the same ﬂower. This is self-pollination
       • Pollen may be transferred to a stigma of a different ﬂower. This is cross
         pollination.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

      • Most angiosperm plants are adapted for cross pollination.
      • Typical characteristics of ﬂowers like such as colour and odour. favour cross
        pollination.
      • In addition, some plants show special types of adaptations cross pollination.
          e.g. heterostyly, self infertility, unisexuality


   Signiﬁcance of cross pollination
   Cross pollination results in cross fertilization. Cross fertilization allows shufﬂing
   of genes within a species, producing new genetic combinations resulting increased
   genetic variation within the species. These features are very important for survival and
   also might lead to evolution.


   Fertilization
   • The pollen grain germinates after it is placed on the stigma.
   • It extends a pollen tube that grows down through the style of the carpel.
   • The generative nucleus divides forming two sperm nuclei.
   • When the pollen tube reaches the ovary, it moves through the micropyle (The pore
     in the integuments of the ovule) and discharges two sperm nuclei into the embryo
     sac.
   • One sperm nucleus fuses with the egg cell forming a diploid zygote and the other
     sperm nucleus fuses with the 2 polar nuclei. This type of fertilization is called
     double fertilization and is unique to angiosperms.
   • After double fertilization, the ovule matures into a seed. The zygote develops into
     the embryo. The triploid nucleus develops into the endosperm that store food.
   • The signiﬁcance of double fertilization is that it synchronizes with the development
     of the embryo.
   • If fertilization does not occur that prevents plants from wasting nutrients on infertile
     ovules.
   • The seed consists of the embryo, endosperm with store food and a seed coat.
   • Seeds are enclosed in the fruit.
   • Fruit is an enlarged and developed ovary, usually after being stimulated by
     fertilization. Fertilization triggers hormonal changes that cause the ovary to form a
     fruit.
   • If a ﬂower has not been pollinated, fruit does not develop, and entire ﬂower falls
     away.
   • During fruit development, the ovary wall gets converted to the pericarp.
      • In some plants fruits develop from the ovary without fertilization. This is called
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

          parthenocarpy. Parthenocarpic fruits do not develop seeds. Parthenocarpy
          occurs naturally in some species.
         e.g. Banana
       • It also can be induced with plant growth substances to get seedless fruits.
         e.g. Grapes, Orange
       • In some plants, seeds develop without fertilization. This is called parthenogenesis.
         e.g. certain grasses
       • In parthenogenesis,
        • the egg is resulted by mitosis and hence is diploid,or
        • haploid ovum fuses with a polar nucleus, or
        • the genetic content of the egg is duplicated to become diploid, enabling seed
          development without fertilizing by the sperm.


    Signiﬁcance of development of seed and fruit
    Seed
       • Seed is the dispersal unit of seed plants which contains the embryo and stored
         food, surrounded by the seed coat
       • The seed habit has a strategy for life on land: The presence of,
          • seed coat- helps to survive in extreme conditions
          • food reserves-provide nourishment to the embryo during development
          • dormancy period helps to survive during unfavorable conditions
          • adaptations for dispersal give a better chance for growth , development and
            survival.
    Fruits
      • Protects the enclosed seeds
       • When mature, aids in their dispersal by wind , water or animals.
       • After being dispersed, if environmental conditions are favourable, a seed may
         germinate to form a seedling.
       • Inhibition of embryo within the seed at one stage of maturation, naturally
         prevents germination of seeds within fruit, which is called seed dormancy.
       • Many seeds have mechanisms of inhibiting germination and remain dormant.
       • Presence of inhibitors, presence of thick/strong seed coats, presence of seed
         coats impervious to water are common causes of seed dormancy.
       • After breaking seed dormancy, when water, oxygen and suitable temperature are
         provided, seeds start to germinate.
       • Absorption of water, activation of enzymes, mobilization of food resources
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
         (nutrients) followed by rapid growth process of the embryo extending radical
         through the seed coat is called seed germination. Radical shows positive
         geotropism and plumule shows negative geotropism.


Plant responses to internal and external Signals

Responses of plants to different stimuli
 Photomorphogenesis:
    • Light triggers many key events in plant growth and development, collectively
      known as photomorphogenesis.
      • Light reception also allows plants to measure the passage of days and seasons.
      • Plants detect not only light signals, but also the direction, intensity and wave
        length (Color)
      • A graph called an action spectrum depicts the relative effectiveness of
        different wave lengths of radiation in carrying out a particular process, such as
        photosynthesis.
      • Action spectrum reveals that red and blue light are the most important colors in
        regulating plant’s photomorphogenesis.
      • The two major classes of light receptors in plants are the blue light photoreceptors
        and phytochromes (which absorb mostly red light)
      • Blue- Light photo receptors initiates a variety of responses in plants, including
        phototropism, the light induced opening of stomata and the light induced slowing
        of hypocotyl elongation that occurs when a seedling breaks ground.
      • Phytochrome photoreceptors regulate many plant responses to light, including
        seed germination and shade avoidance.


   Effect of light on:
   seed germination.
      • As the nutrient reserves are limited, many types of seeds (especially small ones)
         germinate only when the light environment and other conditions are nearly
         optimal.
      • Such seeds often remain dormant for years until light conditions change. (e.g.-
        Plowing a ﬁeld or a death of a shady tree may create a favorable light environment
        for germination)


   plant spacing
      • Phytochromes provide the plant with information about the quality of light which
         enables the plant to get adapted to changes in outside light conditions.
       e.g. “Shade Avoidance” response of a forest tree (below the canopy) that requires
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

        relatively high light intensity. As the forest canopy absorbs more red light allowing
        only far red light to pass through, the tree below the canopy will allocate more of
        its resources to grow taller.
       • In contrast, exposure to direct sunlight increases the proportion of far red: red
         light and thereby stimulates branching and inhibits vertical growth.


    ﬂowering
      • Photoperiod is the interval in a 24hour period in which the plant gets exposed to
        light.
       • Photoperiod controls ﬂowering in many types of plants.


    Shoot elongation and Phototropism
      • The growth of a shoot towards light (positive) or away from it (negative) is
         called phototropism.
       • Positive phototropism strengthen photosynthesis.
       • This response results from a differential growth of cells on opposite sides of the
         shoot; the cells in the darker side elongate faster than the cells on the brighter
         side.


    Response to Gravity
    Gravitropism
      • Shoot of the plant grows upwards while root grows downwards, due to their
         response to gravity or gravitropism.
       • Gravitropism can be either positive or negative.
         e.g. Roots display positive gravitropism while shoot display negative
         gravitropism.
       • Gravitropism occurs as soon as a seed germinates. This ensure that the root
         grows into the soil and shoot grows towards sunlight.
       • Plants may detect gravity by the settling of statoliths.
       • Statoliths of vascular plants are specialized plastids containing dense starch
         grains.
       • They can settle under the gravity, to the lower portions of the cell.
       • In roots, they are located in certain cells of the root cap.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   The statolith hypothesis:
   The aggregation of statoliths at the low points of root cap cells triggers re-distribution
   of Ca2+ which causse lateral transport of auxin within the root. As a result, Ca and
   auxin get accumulated at lower side of elongation zone of root. At high concentration
   of auxin, cell elongation is inhibited resulting slow growth on lower side and more
   rapid elongation on upper side. Consequently, the root grows downwards.


   Response to mechanical stimuli
   Trees grow in windy environment normally have shorter stockier trunks than same
   species growing in normal environmental conditions. Advantage of this is that the tree
   could stand high winds. This exhibits the sensitivity of mechanical stress of plants. the
   changes in plant form due to mechanical disturbances is called thigmomorphogenesis.
   During evolution, some plant species have become ‘touch specialists’. Climbing plants
   have tendrils that coil rapidly around support. Tendril usually grows straight until it
   touches a support. The contact stimulates differential growth on opposite sides of the
   tendril. The directional growth of tendril towards support is called thigmotropism.
   Other touch specialists, respond to touch by rapid leaf movements. E.g. Mimosa
   pudica collapses its leaﬂets when touched. Touching results in a sudden loss of turgor
   of cells in a specialized motor organ called pulvini, causing the leaﬂets to collapse.
   This response is called thigmonasty.


The role of plant growth substances/ hormones/ regulators in response
to different stimuli
   Hormones in general are signaling molecules which are produced in small quantities,
   get transported from the place they are produced to other parts of the organism and
   trigger responses in target cells. or/and effect on plant growth and development. With
   this deﬁnition, its hard to explain some physiological processes in plants. In addition,
   some signaling molecules that are considered as plant hormones act locally. Thus the
   broader term plant growth regulators seem more appropriate.
   Plant growth regulators are natural or synthetic organic compounds which modify or
   control speciﬁc physiological process in plants.
   Plant biologists prefer to use the term plant growth regulators rather than plant
   hormones, as there are certain differences in plant hormones and animal hormones.
   Therefore, plant hormones and plant growth substances are considered as equal. But
   plant hormones are active even at very low concentration.
   Major types of plant hormones/ growth regulators are auxins, gibberlin, cytokinin,
   abscisic acid, ethylene and Jasmonate (jasmonic acid).
Resource Book                                               G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


        Hormone        Functions
        Auxin            • stimulates stem elongation in low concentration
                         • promotes the formation of lateral and adventitious roots
                         • regulates development of fruit
                         • enhances apical dominance
                         • functions in phototropism
                         • functions in gavitotropism
                         • promotes vascular differentiation
                         • retards leaf abscission
        Gibberellins     • stimulate stem elongation
                         • stimulate pollen development
                         • stimulate pollen tube growth
                         • stimulate fruit growth
                         • stimulate seed development and germination
                         • regulate sex determination and transition from juvenile
                           to adult phase
        cytokinins       • regulate cell division in shoots and roots
                         • modify apical dominance and promote lateral bud
                           growth
                         • promote movement of nutrients into sink tissues
                         • stimulate seed germination
                         • delay leaf senescence
        Abscisic         • inhibits growth
        acid             • promotes stomatalclousure during drought stress
                         • promotes seed dormancy and inhibits early germination
                         • promotes leaf senescence
                         • promote dessication tolerance
        Ethylene         • promotes ripening of many types of fruit
                         • promote leaf abscission
                         • promote triple response in seedlings (inhibition of
                           stem elongation, promotion of lateral expansion, and
                           horizontal growth)
                         • enhance the rate of senescence
                         • promote roots and root hair formation
                         • promotes ﬂowering in the pineapple family
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

Response of plants to some biotic and abiotic stresses
   Stress
   Certain factors in the environment may have a potentially adverse effects on a plants’
   survival, growth and reproduction.
   Two types of stresses,
   1. Abiotic stress
   2. Biotic stress


   Response of plants to some biotic and abiotic stresses
   Stress
   Certain factors in the environment may have potentially adverse effects on plants’
   survival, growth and reproduction.
   Two types of stresses;
   3. Abiotic stress(due to nonliving factors)
   4. Biotic stress (due to living factors)


   Abiotic Stress
   Among several common abiotic stresses. Following three stresses are discussed.
   1. Drought stress
   2. Cold stress
   3. Salt stress
   1. Drought stress: Plants may wilt when water loss by transpiration exceeds water
   absorption. Prolonged drought may even kill a plant. Plants have control systems that
   enable them to cope with the drought/ water deﬁcit conditions.
   Water deﬁcit stimulates increased synthesis and release of abscisic acid (ABA), which
   acts on guard cell membrane, closing stomata to reduce transpiration.
   In grasses the leaves roll in to a tube-like shape which reduces the surface area to
   reduce transpiration. Some plants shed their leaves during seasonal drought.


   2.Cold stress: When cell membrane cools below a critical temperature it looses its
   ﬂuidity due to the lipids become locked in to crystalline structure. This blocks the
   transport across the membrane and affects the function of the cell.
   Plants respond to cold stress by altering the lipid composition of their membranes.
   They increase the proportion of unsaturated fatty acids which keeps the membranes
   more ﬂuid at low temperature.
   Freezing is another cold stress. Water in the cell wall and intercellular spaces freezes
   before freezing the solute-rich water in the cytosol. The reduction of liquid water in the
   cell wall lowers the extracellular water potential causing water in the cytosol to leave.
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    This results high concentration of solutes in the cytoplasm which is harmful and may
    lead to cell death.
    Before the onset of winter, the cell of frost-tolerant plants increases cytoplasmic levels
    of speciﬁc solutes such as sugars that help to reduce the loss of water from the cell
    preventing dehydration.


    3. Salt stress: An excess of salts (high salinity) in soil lowers the water potential of soil
    resulting reduced water potential gradient from soil to root. This leads to reduction of
    water uptake by roots.
    In general too high salinity in soil is toxic toplants.
    Many plants can respond to moderate soil salinity by producing solutes that are well
    tolerated at high concentrations. These are organic compounds that keep the water
    potential of cell more negative than that of the soil solution.
    A few plants that are salt-tolerant (halophytes) have developed salt glands, which
    secrete excess salts out of the plant across leaf surfaces. e.g. many mangrove plants


    Biotic stress –
    How plants defend themselves against pest and pathogens attack;
    In plant defense mechanisms, some compounds and structures are already existed
    whilst some others are formed after infection or pest attack. Therefore, two categories
    of defense mechanisms called preexisting and induced mechanisms can be identiﬁed.
    Preexisting structural and chemical defense mechanisms;
    - Amount and quality of wax and cuticle that cover the epidermal cells
    - The structure of the epidermal cell walls and thickness
    - The size, location and shapes of stomata
    - Toxic compounds, alkaloids (eg. Nicotine), phenolics (eg. Flavonoids,
    lignin & tannins), terpenoids (eg. Azadirachtin) and lectin
    - Thorns, pricks, trichromes


    Induced structural and chemical defense mechanisms;
    - Morphological changes in the cell wall
    - Formation of cork and abscission layers
    - Phenolic compounds
    - Toxic compounds
    - Enzymes that can degrade fungal cell walls or damage insect organs
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book



  05
      Animal form and function

Relate the Structure of Animal Tissues to their function


   T    here are four major types of animal tissues : Epithelial tissue, Connective tissue,
        Muscle tissue and Nervous tissue.


1. Epithelial tissue: -
   Characteristics
   It covers external or internal free surfaces and organs. The cells of the tissues are
   closely packed. Cells of epithelial tissue have both apical and basal surfaces where
   apical surface remains free and the basal surface attached to the basement membrane.
   No blood vessels in the tissue. Tissue gets nutrients and oxygen from the underneath
   connective tissue.


   Functions-
     • Protection (e.g. barrier against mechanical injury, pathogens, barrier against
        ﬂuid loss
      • Secretion (e.g. enzymes, hormones, mucus, sweat)
      • Absorption (e.g. nutrients, respiratory gases )


   There are two general types according to the number of cell layers on the basement
   membrane.
      • Simple epithelia – Single cell layer (e.g simple squamous, simple cuboidal,
        simple columnar and pseudostratiﬁed)
      • Compound epithelia – several cell layers (e.g. stratiﬁed squamous, transitional)
   Simple squamous epithelium –
   It is a single layer with plate like cells. This type of epithelium is thin and leaky. They
   are found in places where materials exchange by diffusion.
   e.g: blood capillaries, alveoli,
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                        Fig 5.1: simple squamous epithelium


    Simple cuboidal epithelium –
    It is a single cell layer with dice shaped cells specialized for secretion. It is found in
    kidney tubules, many glands such as thyroid glands and salivary glands




                         Fig 5.2: simple caboildal epithelium
    Simple columnar epithelium
    It is a single layer with large and brick-shaped cells. It is often found in places where
    secretion or active absorption is important. e.g. intestinal lining




                                  Fig 5.3 : simple coloumnar epithelium
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book


   Pseudostratiﬁed columnar epithelium
   This tissue consists of a single cell layer. Cells are not of equal height. Nuclei of
   cells are located at different level. Appear as several layers. In many vertebrates this
   epithelium has ciliated cells that form a mucous membrane and the cilia help to sweep
   the mucous along the surface. e.g. nasal passage, trachea.




                 Fig 5.4 : Pseudostratiﬁed squamous epitheium


  Compound epithelia –
  Stratiﬁed squamous epithelium:
  This tissue is composed of a number of layers of cells. This epithelium regenerates
  rapidly. Cell division produces new cells near the basement membrane. The old cells
  are sloughed off and replaced by the new cells . This epithelium is found on surfaces
  where they are subjected to abrasion such as outer skin, lining of mouth, anus, vagina




                 Fig 5.5: Stratiﬁed squamous epithelium
2. Connective tissue
   Characteristics
   Connective tissues are the most abundant tissues in the body that help to connect
   organs and tissues together structurally and functionally. These types of tissue
   consist of different types of cells scattered in a large amount of extracellular matrix
   containing different types of ﬁbres. Matrix may be a semisolid (Jelly-like), liquid or
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    solid (dense and rigid). Different types of cells can be found in the matrix such as
    ﬁbroblasts (secrete ﬁber proteins), macrophages (engulf foreign particles or any cell
    debris by phagocytosis) and mast cells ( secrete heparin and histamine) in addition fat
    cells (storage and insulation) and leukocytes (protection) are found in some connective
    tissues.
    There are three different types of ﬁbers. They are collagen ﬁbers (provide strength
    and ﬂexibility), reticular ﬁbers (join connective tissues to adjacent tissues) and elastic
    ﬁbers (make tissue elastic).


    Functions
      • Binding and structural support
       • Protection
       • Transport of materials
       • Insulation


    There are different types of connective tissues. They are loose connective tissue
    (Areolar tissue), Fibrous connective tissue (Dense connective tissue), adipose tissue,
    blood, cartilage and bone .


    Loose connective tissue (Areolar Tissue)
    This tissue is the most widely distributed connective tissue type in the vertebrate body.
    This can be considered as the generalized type of connective tissue. Types of cells in
    this tissue are ﬁbroblasts, macrophages, mast cells, leukocytes and fat cells.
    All three types of ﬁbres are found in this tissue. Fibers are loosely arranged and wavy
    in nature. This tissue binds epithelia and the underlying tissue. Therefore this holds
    organs in place. This tissue is found under the skin and throughout the body.


    Fibrous connective tissue (Dense connective tissue)
    This tissue is densely packed with collagen ﬁbers. Therefore the matrix is relatively
    reduced and contains fewer cells (ﬁbrocytes). This tissue is found in tendons (attach
    muscle to bones) and ligaments (connect bones and joints) where tensile strength is
    required.


    Adipose tissue
    This tissue is packed with adipose cells. Each adipose cell contains a large fat droplet.
    This is a specialized type of loose connective tissue which pads and insulates the body
    and stores fuel as fat molecules. For instance, it is found under the skin where it act as
    a thermal insulator and energy store.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                            Resource Book


   Blood tissue
   It is a specialized connective tissue where the matrix is not secreted by the cells and ﬁbers
   are formed only during blood clotting process. The extracellular matrix of the blood
   is liquid. It is called as plasma. The blood plasma contains salts, water and dissolved
   proteins. Red blood cells (transport respiratory gases), white blood cells (defense) and
   platelets (blood clotting) are suspended in the blood plasma. Main functions of blood
   tissues include transport of materials, protection, and osmoregulation. (For further
   details refer pg 195)


   Cartilage
   This tissue consists of a matrix composed of chondroitin sulphate which is a rubbery
   protein-carbohydrate complex. Collagen ﬁbers and chondrocytes are embedded in
   the matrix. Chondrocytes secrete chondroitin sulphate and collagen ﬁbers. This tissue
   provides support and ﬂexibility in places such as trachea, intervertebral discs.


   Bone
   It is a mineralized connective tissue. Matrix consists of collagen ﬁbres and inorganic
   salts. Inorganic salts are Calcium, magnesium and phosphate ions. Cells are osteoblasts
   (bone forming cells) and osteocytes (mature bone cells that maintain bone tissue).
   Osteocytes are enclosed within lacunae. The mammalian hard bone has repeating units
   called osteons. Each osteons has a concentric layer of mineralized materials. At the
   centre of the osteon is a central canal containing blood vessels and nerves. This tissue
   forms the endoskeleton of most vertebrates and provides support and strength to the
   body.


   3. Muscle tissue
   Muscle tissue is responsible for movement. The cells in the muscle tissue are composed
   of actin and myosin proteins. This tissue is able to contract and relax. There are three
   basic types of muscle tissues found in the vertebrate animal body. They are smooth
   muscle, skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle tissues.


   Smooth muscle tissue
   The cells of the smooth muscle tissue are spindle shaped and uninucleated. Cells lack
   striations. This tissue is responsible for involuntary body functions (e.g. churning
   of stomach, constriction of arteries). This tissue is found in digestive tract, urinary
   bladder, arteries and other internal organs.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Skeletal muscle tissue
    They are composed of bundles of long cells with multi nuclei. Cells are striated. The
    contractile units of this muscle cells are called sarcomers. This gives the striated
    appearance to the muscle cells. The arrangement of the sarcomere gives the striated
    appearance. The muscles are generally attached to the skeletal system and helps mainly
    in voluntary body movements.


    Cardiac muscle tissue
    They are composed of uninucleated cells which are interconnected via intercalated
    discs. Cells are striated with sarcomeres. Cardiac muscle tissue is responsible for
    involuntary heart contractions. Intercalated disks help relay signals from cell to cell
    and synchronize heart contraction. Cardiac muscle tissue is only found in the wall of
    the heart.




                                   Fig 5.6: Muscle tissue


    4. Nervous tissue
    Nervous tissue contains neurons and glial cells. Neurons receive, process and transmit
    nerve impulses. Neuroglia (Glial cells) support the neurons.
    Neurons: A neuron has cell body, dendrites and axon. The basic structural unit of
    the nervous system is the neuron. Dendrites and cell body is used to receive nerve
    impulses from other neurons. Axon is used to transmit impulses to other neurons, cells
    or muscles. Axons are bundled together into nerves.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   Neuroglia (Glial cells): Neuroglial cells are supportive cells of neurons. Their functions
   include nourishment of nerve cells, insulation of nerve cells, replenishing neurons and
   sometimes modulate neuron functions.




                 Fig 5.7: The structure of the Motor neuron
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

                              Nutrition in animals

  Animal nutrition is the process by which food is taken in for make use in different
  body functions. Typically food is broken into smaller molecules and absorbed prior to
  utilization. Animals are heterotrophs.
  Heterptrophic nutrition is the process by which the organisms obtain organic food
  molecules by ingesting other organisms or by substances derived from other organisms.
  Other than animals, fungi and majority of bacteria are heterotrophs. There are two
  type of heterotrophic nutrition namely, holozoic nutrition and symbiosis.


  Holozoic nutrition
  Most animals are holozoic where they ingest food into their alimentary canal. This
  mode of nutrition consists of ﬁve main stages: Ingestion, digestion, absorption,
  assimilation and elimination/ Egestion.


  Main stages in holozoic nutrition
   • Ingestion: This is the ﬁrst stage where the act of eating or feeding happens.
      Food sources differ among animal species and they possess different modes of
      ingestion according to the diet or environment.
     • Digestion: Food is broken down into molecules small enough to pass through
       the membranes and enter the cells of organisms. Digestion could occur
       mechanically (by teeth or muscle contractions) and chemically (by enzymes).
       During mechanical digestion, food is broken down in to smaller fragments
       thus increase the surface area for efﬁcient chemical digestion. During chemical
       digestion enzymes break bonds in large molecules into small molecules.
  The last two stages of food processing occur after the food is digested.
     • Absorption: In this stage, the animal’s cells take up small molecules. e.g.simple
       sugars, amino acids
     • Assimilation: Assimilation is the process of utilization of absorbed nutrients for
       various functions of the body.
     • Elimination: In this process undigested materials are passed out from the
       alimentary canal.


  Feeding Mechanisms of animals
    • Filter feeders: They strain suspended food particles from the surrounding
       watery medium. They use several mechanisms such as capturing, trapping, etc.
        e.g. - clams and oysters - feed on small pieces of food in the water that passes
        over their gills. Cilia in the gills sweep the food particles to the animal’s mouth
        in a ﬁlm of mucus.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                           Resource Book
      • Fluid feeders: They suck nutrient rich ﬂuid from a living host using well adapted
        mouth parts.
          e.g: Mosquitoes-suck human blood, Aphids- suck phloem sap of plants, Bees
          and humming birds suck -honey from ﬂowers
      • Substrate feeders: These animals live inside their food source or on the food
        source eating its way through the food.
          e.g. The leaf miner caterpillar - eating through the soft tissues of a leaf
              Maggots (ﬂy larvae) -    burrow into animal carcasses
      • Bulk feeders: Animals which eat comparatively large pieces of food. These
        animals have different types of adaptations to tear the food or to capture the pray
        (e.g. jaws, teeth, tentacles, claws, poisonous fangs ).
        e.g. - Most animals including human


      • Symbiosis
         This is an ecological relationship between organisms of two different species
         that live closely together. It is divided into three groups such as Mutualism,
         Parasitism and Commensalism


      • Mutualism: It is a close association between two living organisms of different
        species which beneﬁts both partners.
         e. g. - Cellulose digesting microorganisms in Ruminants and Termites


      • Parasitism: It is a close association between two living organisms of different
        species which is beneﬁcial to one (parasite) and harmful to the other (host).
        Parasites live either within or on the host and derive its nourishment
         e.g. –Tape worm and humans, Lice and humans


      • Commensalism: It is a close association between two living organisms of
        different species which is beneﬁcial to one and does not affect the other (neither
        harmful or beneﬁcial)
         e.g.- Barnacles attached to whales
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

Human Digestive system

    Structure and function of the human digestive system

    Human alimentary canal is a long tube/ tract which connects with external environment
    and can fulﬁll steps of holozoic mode of nutrition. Human digestive system consists of
    alimentary canal and associated glands. The alimentary canal consists of the following
    parts: oral cavity, pharynx, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, rectum
    and anus. The associated glands include salivary glands, pancreas and liver.




                 Fig 5.8 :- Structure of the Human Digestive tract
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book

   Mouth/ Oral cavity: Oral cavity consists of the tongue, teeth and salivary glands.
   Ingestion and initial steps of digestion are carried out in the oral cavity. In the mouth
   both mechanical and chemical digestion is carried out. There are four types of teeth in
   the mouth: incisors, canines, premolars and molars. Food is cut, mashed and ground
   by different types of teeth with different shapes. This makes it easier to swallow food
   and increase the surface area for digestion.
   Salivary glands release saliva into the oral cavity through ducts. Releasing saliva into
   the oral cavity occurs when food enters the oral cavity due to a nervous reﬂex. Saliva
   is also released into the mouth before food is ingested due to various other stimuli. e.g.
   sight, odor of food, etc.
   Saliva contains water, amylase, mucus (a viscous mixture of salts, cells and slippery
   glycoprotein called mucins). In addition to that, saliva composed of buffers and anti
   microbial components.
   Functions of the saliva
     • Salivary amylase: Chemical digestion of polysaccharides (e.g. starch) into
        smaller polysaccharides and disaccharide maltose.
      • Water: Liquefy food and provide watery medium for chemical digestion. Aids in
        taste reception.
      • Mucus: Lubrication of food which makes it easier for swallowing. Clean the
        mouth and protects the lining of the mouth from abrasion.
      • Antimicrobial substances such as immunoglobulin and lysozymes: Protect
        against bacteria that enter the mouth.
      • Buffers prevent tooth decay by neutralizing acid


   Tongue: composed of skeletal muscles. Helps to mix the food with saliva and make
   bolus of food that makes easier for swallowing. Then helps to push the bolus into the
   posterior part of the oral cavity and into the pharynx.


   Pharynx: a common passage of the respiratory tract and the digestive tract. The
   pharynx leads to the esophagus.


   Esophagus:
   It is a long tube which connects the pharynx and the stomach. It is found in the thoracic
   cavity. The wall of the esophagus consists of both skeletal and smooth muscles. The
   skeletal muscles are located towards the uppermost part of the esophagus and these
   muscles function during swallowing. The rest of the esophagus consists of smooth
   muscles which are involved in the process called peristalsis. During this process the
   food bolus is pushed along the esophagus which is a alternative wave of rhythmic
   contractions and relaxations of the smooth muscles lining the esophagus.
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Stomach- The stomach is a J- shaped dilated sac in the abdominal cavity. The inner
    surface of the stomach is highly folded and contains large number of pits that leads
    to gastric glands. Gastric glands contain three types of cells: mucus cells, chief cells
    and parietal cells. The stomach wall is very elastic. Distal part of the stomach connects
    with the small intestine. Sphincters are found at the junctions between esophagus and
    stomach (cardiac sphincter) and stomach and the small intestine(pyloric sphincter).
    They are made up of circular smooth muscles. These sphincters help to regulate the
    passage of materials between these organs.


    Chemical digestion in the stomach
    The gastric glands of the stomach secrete gastric juice. The gastric juice mainly consists
    of mucus, pepsinogen and HCl. Mucus and pepsinogen (inactive form of pepsin )
    are secreted by mucous cells and chief cells respectively. The parietal cells release
    hydrogen ions and chloride ions separately into the stomach lumen where HCl is
    formed. Pepsinogen is initially converted into pepsin by HCl. These activated pepsin
    help to activate remaining pepsinogen molecules. This activated pepsin initiates the
    chemical digestion of proteins in the stomach. The churning action of the stomach
    facilitates the chemical digestion. This is a series of muscle contraction and relaxation.
    This process mixes the swallowed food with gastric juice. Proteins are hydrolyzed to
    small polypeptides by pepsin. In the stomach food is mixed with gastric juice forming
    chyme (partially digested semisolid, acidic, food mass).
    The stomach lining is protected from the digestion of HCl and pepsin in several ways:
    Enzymes are secreted in to the lumen as an inactive enzyme; Gastric glands secrete
    mucus that protect against self-digestion of the stomach lining ; Every three days, cell
    division adds a new epithelial cell layer which replaces the destroyed/ damaged cells
    in the lining of the stomach.


    Functions of the stomach
      • Act as a temporary reservoir for food due to high convolution and very elastic
         wall.
       • Mechanical digestion of food by churning action due to muscular contraction.
       • Produce gastric juice which starts the chemical digestion of proteins to
         polypeptide by pepsin
       • Absorption of some materials such as water, alcohol and some drugs
       • Non speciﬁc defense-HCl kills microbes
       • Small jets of gastric contents push out through pyloric sphincter as chyme
       • Secretion of gastrin hormone which regulates digestion in the stomach.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                           Resource Book
   Small intestine-
   It is the longest organ in the alimentary canal. It is divided into three regions: duodenum,
   jejunum and ileum. The duodenum: C shaped curve, around the head of the pancreas.
   The jejunum is middle part of the small intestine. The ileum is the terminal part
   of the small intestine. The surface area of the small intestine is greatly increased by
   permanent circular folds and villi. The villi are tiny ﬁnger like projections of the
   intestinal wall. Most of the digestion is completed in the duodenum. The major sites
   for nutrient absorption are jejunum and ileum.




                                  Fig 5.9 Structure of the villus


   Chemical digestion in the small intestine
   Small intestine receives chyme from the stomach. Peristaltic contractions aid the
   receiving of this chyme. Pyloric sphincter regulate the passing of chyme into the
   small intestine. The chyme is mixed with secretions of glands in intestinal wall and
   secretions of pancreas and liver. (refer pages no: 169,170). The epithelium of the
   duodenum secretes several digestive enzymes. Glands of the intestinal wall secrete
   enzymes such as Disaccharidases, Dipeptidases, Carboxypeptidases, Aminopeptidases,
   Nucleotidases, Nucleosidases and Phosphotases. Some of these enzymes are secreted
   to the lumen and others are bound to the surface of the epithelium.


   Two hormones namely cholecystokonin and secretin secreted by duodenum stimulates
   the release of pancreatic juice and the bile. Pancreatic juice contains enzymes such as
   Trypsin, Chymotrypsin , Pancreatic amylase , Pancreatic Carboxypeptidases, Pancreatic
   Nucleases and Pancreatic Lipases. In addition it also contains bicarbonates. The liver
   secretes Bile which is stored in the gall bladder until released into the duodenum.
Resource Book                                                         G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    The Bile contains Bile salts which act as emulsiﬁers that help in fat digestion and
    absorption.


    Carbohydarte digestion
    Pancreatic amylase catalyze the conversion of polysaccharides (e.g. starch) into
    disaccharides. Intestinal disaccharidases catalyze the conversion of disaccharides into
    monosaccharides.

                                         Pancreatic amylases
           Polysaccharides                                            Disaccharides

                                         Disaccharidases
            Disaccharides                                             Monosaccharides

    Protein digestion
    Tripsin and Chymotripsin catalyse the conversion of small polypeptides into smaller
    polypeptides. These smaller polypeptides are converted to small peptides and amino
    acids by the catalytic action of Panceratic carboxypeptidases. Proteases secreted by
    the intestinal epithelium (Dipeptidases, Carboxypeptidases and Aminopeptidases)
    catalyse the conversion of small peptides into amino acids.

                               Pancreatic trypsin and chymotrypsin
        Small polypeptides                                            Smaller polyeptides


                               Pancreatic carboxypeptidase
      Smaller polypeptides                                            Small peptides



                         Dipeptidases, Carboxypeptidases, and Amino   peptidases

        Small polypeptides/                                           Amino acids
        smaller polypeptides




    Fat digestion
    Digestion of fats (triglycerides) starts in the small intestine. First bile salts emulsify
    fats. Next Pancreatic lipase catalyse the conversion of these fats into fatty acids,
    glycerol and monoglycerides.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                Resource Book


                                  Pancreatic lipase
         Fat (triglycerides)                                           Glycerol, fatty acids,
                                                                       monoglycerides


   Nucleic acid digestion
   Digestion of nucleic acids start in the small intestine. Pancreatic nucleases catalyse
   the conversion of DNA and RNA into nucleotides. These nucleotides are eventually
   converted into nitrogenous bases, sugars and phosphates by the catalytic action of
   intestinal Nucleotidases, Nucleosidases and Phosphatases.

                                     Pancreatic nucleases
               DNA, RNA                                               Nucleotides

                                  Nucleotidases/Nucleosidases and
                                  phosphatatases
             Nucleotides                                            Nitrogenous bases,
                                                                    sugars, phosphates

   Absorption in the small intestine
     • For effective absorption, the surface area of the intestinal wall has been
       increased with three structural modiﬁcations: heavy permanent foldings, ﬁnger
       like projections called villi in the intestinal wall and ﬁnger like microscopic
       projections called microvilli in the epithelial cells of the villi. These micro villi
       are exposed into the intestinal lumen, it gives the appearance of brush (brush
       border).
      • Transport of the nutrients across the epithelium may be active or passive. For
        example Fructose is absorbed by facilitated diffusion. Amino acids, small
        peptides, vitamins, and most glucose molecules are actively transported into the
        epithelial cells.
      • Then these nutrients from the epithelial cells are transported into the blood
        capillaries in the villi. Those blood capillaries are converged into the hepatic
        portal veins. These nutrients are carried in to the liver via the hepatic portal
        veins. From the liver, this nutrient ﬁlled blood is transported into the tissues.
      • But absorption of some products of fat digestion takes place in a different
        pathway: Fatty acids and monoglycerides are absorbed into the cell through
        microvilli. Within the cells triglycerides are reformed and they are incooperated
        into water soluble globules called chylomicrons. These chylomicrons are
        transported into the lacteal and then into the blood vessels through lymph. Then
        they are transported throughout the body via the circulatory system.
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

        • In addition to nutrient absorption, recovery of water and ions mostly occur in the
          small intestine. In addition to the water intake (about 2 L) digestive juices add
          more water (about 7 L) into the small intestine. Most of this water is reabsorbed
          via osmosis.


     Large intestine – The large intestine is the terminal end of the alimentary canal. It
     is divided into three regions: colon (proximal part), cecum and rectum. The small
     intestine is connected to the large intestine at a ‘T’ shaped junction. One arm of the
     ‘T’ junction is colon and the other arm is a small pouch called cecum. A ﬁnger like
     projection in the cecum is called the appendix. The colon leads to the rectum and anus.
     Cecum is important for fermentation of indigested materials by microbes, especially
     in animals that eat large amount of plant matter.


     Functions of the large intestine
        • The colon: completes the reabsorption of water, synthesize some Vitamin B
          complexes, Vitamin K and folic acid with the help of microbes and move feces
          (consists of undigested matter such as ﬁbres) along the colon by peristalsis.
        • The rectum stores feces until they are eliminated. Presence of two sphincters
          between the rectum and anus can regulate feces movement. Strong contractions
          in the colon trigger the defecation.
  Associated glands
     Pancreas




                 Fig 5.10: The pancreas in relation to the duodenum and biliary tract
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

   Histological structure of pancreas

   The pancreas is a pale grey gland which consists of a broad head, a body and a narrow
   tail. Head is in the curve of the duodenum. Pancreas is both an exocrine and endocrine
   gland.
   The exocrine part consists of a large number of lobules made up of small acini, the
   walls of which consist of secretary cells. Each lobule is drained by a tiny duct and
   these unite eventually to form the pancreatic duct which joins with bile duct to form
   hepato pancreatic duct and opens into the duodenum at its midpoint. Exocrine part
   of the pancreas secretes pancreatic juice. The components of the pancreatic juice
   are bicarbonate, carbohydrate digesting enzymes (pancreatic amylase), pancreatic
   lipase, nucleases and inactive form of protein digesting enzymes(trpsinogen and
   chymotrypsinogen). These inactive enzymes are converted to active enzymes(trypsin
   and chymotrypsin) upon secretion into the lumen of the duodenum.


   Endocrine part of the pancreas is the islets of Langerhans, which consist of group
   of specialized cells. They do not have ducts. Islets of Langerhans secrete hormones,
   glucagan and insulin which are involved in glucose homeostasis.




                 Fig 5.11: Histological structure of the pancreas
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Liver
    Liver is the largest gland in the body. Its upper and anterior surfaces are smooth and
    convex. Its posterior surface is irregular in outline. Liver contains four lobes. Each
    lobe is made up of tiny hexagonal shape lobules which are the functional unit. These
    lobules are made up of cuboidal cells called hepatocytes which are arranged in pairs of
    columns radiating from a central vein. Between two pairs of column of cells there are
    sinusoids (blood vessels with incomplete walls) containing mixture of blood from the
    tiny branches of the portal vein and hepatic artery. This arrangement allows venous
    blood (high concentration of nutritional materials) to mix with arterial blood and come
    into close contact with liver cells. Hepatic macrophages (Kupffer cells) are found in
    the lining of the sinusoids. Blood drains from the sinusoids into central veins which
    joins with veins from the other lobules, forming larger veins and eventually the hepatic
    vein. (ﬁg 5.12). Bile canaliculi run between columns of liver cells. Canaliculi join up
    to form larger bile canals. In the corner of the hexagonal structure a branch of hepatic
    artery, a branch of the hepatic portal vein and intra lobular bile duct can be found.
    Liver is a vital organ that performs many important functions. In addition to its role in
    food digestion it is also perform functions such as metabolism of carbohydrates, fats
    and proteins, detoxiﬁcation of drugs and toxic substances, defense against microbes,
    some hormone inactivation and heat production.




                Fig 5.12: Histological structure of the liver
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                            Resource Book

   Function of liver related to digestion
   The liver secretes bile which is stored in the gall bladder until released into the
   duodenum. The bile contains bile salts which act as emulsiﬁers that help in fat digestion
   and absorption.
   Most of the absorbed nutrients reach the liver and it regulates the distribution of
   nutrients to the rest of the body. Excess glucose is stored as glycogen in the liver
   cells. Glycogen deposition and break down in the liver cells are regulated by insulin
   and glucagon hormones. Fat soluble Vitamins (A,D,E and K) and some water soluble
   vitamins (B12), iron and copper are also stored in liver.


   Regulation of digestion in man
   Digestion in man is regulated by two ways: nervous regulation and endocrine
   regulation. Nervous regulation is mainly by nervous reﬂexes. For example nervous
   reﬂex stimulates the release of saliva when food reach the mouth. Arrival of food in
   the stomach trigger churning and release of gastric juices. Endocrine system plays a
   critical role in digestion especially in the stomach and small intestine.
   when food arrives the stomach, the stomach wall is stretched. This triggers to release
   the hormone gastrin. Gastrin circulates via the blood stream and arrives the stomach.
   Then gastrin stimulates the production of gastric juice at the stomach.
   Fatty acids and amino acids in the chyme trigger the release of Cholecystokinin and
   Secretin from the duodenum. Cholecystokinin triggers release of bile from the gall
   bladder and digestive enzymes from the pancreas. Secretin stimulates the release of
   bicarbonate from the pancreas. Bicarbonate neutralize the chyme received from the
   stomach
   When the chyme is rich in fat, food digestion in the stomach slows down due to high
   levels of Cholecystokinin and Secretin secreted by duodenum. These hormones act on
   the stomach and inhibit peristalsis and gastric juice secretion.


   Balanced Diet
   The balanced diet contains the all essential nutrients required for health in the appropriate
   proportions. Essential components of the balanced diet contain carbohydrates, proteins,
   lipids, ﬁbers, minerals, vitamins and water. Carbohydrates and lipids supply energy.
   Energy requirements vary with age, sex, body size and activity. Twenty amino acids are
   needed to synthesize proteins in the body. Most of these amino acids are synthesized
   within the body. They are known as non essential amino acids (e.g. Alanine, cystine,
   etc). Other amino acids (e.g. lysine and histidine, etc.) must be obtained from the diet
   as they can’t be synthesized within the body. They are called essential amino acids.
   Animal proteins contain all the essential amino acids in proper proportions. However
   most plant proteins lack one or more essential amino acids. Therefore vegetarian based
   diet requires several sources of plant proteins to obtain all the essential amino acids.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Components of foods and their functions
      • Carbohydrates
       • Proteins
       • Lipids
       • Vitamins
       • Mineral elements
       •       water
       • ﬁbers


    Carbohydrates
    Carbohydrates are sugars and polysaccharides. They can be found in a variety of foods
    such as rice, bread, biscuits, cereals, hoppers, etc. during digestion most carbohydrates
    are broken down into monosaccharides which are absorbed into blood stream.


    Functions of digestible carbohydrates
      • Provide energy and heat: breakdown of carbohydrates provides ATP for body
         functions and generates heat.
       • Act as an energy stores. e.g. excess carbohydrates are converted into glycogen
         and fat
       • Facilitates protein sparing- proteins are not used to get energy when there is an
         adequate carbohydrates in the food
     Proteins
    Proteins are made up of amino acids during the digestion, proteins are broken down
    into amino acids and absorbed into the blood stream.
    The amino acids are grouped into two groups i.e. essential amino acids and non
    essential amino acids. These essential amino acids cannot be synthesized in the body,
    therefore they should be obtained into the body through the diet. The non essential
    amino acids can be synthesized within the body. Therefore it is not necessary to obtain
    them through the diet.


    Functions of proteins in the diet
      • The amino acids which are supplied from proteins
           • are used for growth and repair of body cells and tissues
           •     are used for synthesis of plasma proteins, enzymes, antibodies and some
                hormones
       • Act as an energy source for body functions
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

   Lipids
   Lipids in the diet are mainly composed of fats and oils. Fatty acids are composed of
   fats and oils. Fatty acids can be grouped as essential and non essential fatty acids.
   Essential fatty acids cannot be synthesized within the body while the non essential
   fatty acids can be synthesized within the body. Therefore essential fatty acids should
   be obtained through the food.


   Functions of lipids in the diet
     • Provide energy and heat (on weight basis fats and oils provide more energy
        compared to carbohydrates and proteins)
      • Help in transport and storage of fat soluble vitamins such as Vitamin A, D, E and
        K
      • Store energy as fat in the adipose tissues
      • Help to synthesize steroid hormones from cholesterol.
      • Provide insulation: (e.g fat found in subcutaneous layer in the skin reduces heat
        loss , constituents of myelin sheath of neurons)

   Vitamins
   Vitamins are organic compounds required in small amounts for the maintenance of
   normal health and metabolism. Vitamins cannot be produced in the body and therefore
   should be provided in the diet. If the vitamins are insufﬁciently taken into the body,
   that may lead to the deﬁciency diseases. Vitamins are two types they are fat soluble
   vitamins (Vitamin A, D, E and K) and water soluble vitamins (Vitamin B and C).


   Main Functions of Vitamins
    • Vitamin A- form visual pigments in the eye, epithelial tissue maintenance,
       promotion of growth and immunity
      • Vitamin B- components of coenzymes such as FAD and NAD, promote red
        blood cell production
      • Vitamin C- act as an antioxidant, used in collagen synthesis
      • Vitamin D- aids in absorption and use of Calcium and Phosphorous
      • Vitamin E- act as an antioxidant
      • Vitamin K- important in blood clotting

   Minerals
   Minerals are inorganic substances and they are also important for normal health and
   many body functions. Major mineral elements needed by humans are Ca, P, S, K, Cl,
   Na, Mg, Fe, F and I . In addition minerals needed in trace amounts include Co, Cu,
   Mn, Mo, Se and Zn.
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Main functions of minerals include
     • Ca- form bones and teeth, helps clotting blood and nerve and muscle function
       • P- form bones and teeth, help maintain in acid base balance
       • S- components of some amino acids
       • K- help maintain in acid base balance and water balance, nerve function
       • Cl- help maintain in acid base balance, maintain osmotic balance, nerve function
       • Na- help maintain in acid base balance and water balance, nerve function
       • Mg- act as enzyme cofactor
       • Fe- components of hemoglobin and electron carriers, act as an enzyme cofactor
       • F- maintenance of tooth structure
       • I- component of thyroid hormone


    Water
    Water accounts for around 60% of the body mass in humans. Normally water is lost
    through urine, sweating and feces. Therefore amount of water in the body should be
    balanced within the body. This water can be taken in to the body by drinking and via
    foods.
    Functions of water in human body
      • Provides the moist internal environment for all living cells.
       • Major component of blood and tissue ﬂuid therefore helps to transport materials
         around the body and to exchange materials between blood and tissues and body
         cells
       • Regulate body temperature mainly through evaporative cooling
       • Dilute waste products and toxins and provide a medium for their excretion
       • Moisten the food and that make easier to swallow
    Fibres
    Dietary ﬁbres (non starch polysaccharides) are made up of indigestible polysaccharides
    in the diet. Fibres are rich in fruit, vegetable and cereals.


    Functions of dietary ﬁbres
      • Provide bulk to the diet and satisfy the appetite.
       • Prevent constipation by attracting water to increase faecal bulk and stimulating
         peristalsis leading to defecation.
       • Adequate ﬁbres in the diet protect against some gastro-intestinal disorders such
         as cancers in the colon and rectum.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                   Resource Book


   Essential nutrients: Essential nutrients are the substances that cannot be synthesized
   in the body from simple precursors and must therefore be taken through the diet.
   These essential nutrients include essential amino acids, essential fatty acids, vitamins
   and minerals. Essential nutrients have key functions in bio synthetic reaction in the
   body cells. If these essential nutrients are not supplied in correct proportions in the
   diet that will lead to malnutrition. Therefore it is essential to obtain them in correct
   amounts.
   Essential amino acids: Essential amino acids are the amino acids that must be
   obtained from the food since they cannot be synthesized within the body from organic
   precursor molecules. Of the 20 amino acids required to make proteins in the body 8
   amino acids are essential amino acids. Examples for essential amino acids are leucine
   and methionine. The animal protein products (e.g. eggs, meat, cheese, etc.) will
   provide all essential amino acids in correct proportions required for body functions.
   Most plant proteins are “incomplete” as they are deﬁcient in one or more amino acids.
   Therefore vegetarian diet should contain a variety of plant proteins in order to obtain
   all the essential amino acids required.
   Essential fatty acids: Essential fatty acids are the fatty acids that should be obtained
   from the diet since they cannot be synthesized in the body from organic precursors.
   Seeds, grains and vegetables provide enough amounts of essential fatty acids.


   Table : Dietary sources and deﬁciency symptoms of vitamins and minerals
    Vitamin/ Mineral         Main dietary sources            Deﬁciency symptoms

    Fat soluble vitamins
    Vitamin A (retinol)      Dark green vegetables,          Blindness, skin disorders, immunity
                             orange vegetables and fruits,   impairment
                             dairy products
    Vitamin D                Egg yolk, dairy products        Bone deformities(rickets) in children,
                                                             bone softening in adults
    Vitamin E                Vegetable oils, nuts, seeds     Nervous system degeneration
    Vitamin K                Green vegetables, tea,          Defective blood clotting
                             produced by colon bacteria
    Water soluble vitamins
    Thiamine ( Vitamin B1)   Legumes, peanuts, whole         Beriberi(characterized by tingling,
                             grains, pork                    poor coordination, susceptibility to
                                                             infection, reduced heart function)
    Riboﬂavin (Vitamin B2) Dairy products, meats,            Skin lesions (cracks at corners of
                           vegetables, enriched grains       mouth)
    Niacin (Vitamin B3)    Grains, nuts, meats.              Pellagra(characterized by lesions in
                                                             skin, mental confusion and diarrhea)
    Pantothenic acid         Dairy products, fruits,         Fatigue, numbness, tingling of hands
    (Vitamin B5 )            vegetables, grains              and feet
Resource Book                                                             G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


     Vitamin/ Mineral          Main dietary sources            Deﬁciency symptoms

     Pyridoxine                Whole grains, Meats,            Irritability, anemia
     (Vitamin B6)              vegetables
     Biotin (Vitamin B7)       Meats, legumes, vegetables      Neuro- muscular disorders, scaly skin
                                                               inﬂammation
     Folic acid (Vitamin B9)   Green vegetables, whole         Anemia, birth defects
                               grains
     Cobalamin(Vitamin         Dairy products, eggs, meats     Loss of balance, numbness, anemia
     B12)
     Ascorbic acid             Citrus fruits, broccoli,        Scurvy (characterized by degeneration
     (Vitamin C)               tomatoes                        of skin and teeth) , delayed wound
                                                               healing

     Minerals
     Calcium (Ca)              Dairy products, dark green      Loss of bone mass, impaired growth
                               vegetables, legumes
     Iron (Fe)                 Whole grains, green leafy        Anemia, weakness, impaired
                               vegetables, legumes, meats,     immunity
                               eggs
     Phosphorus (P)            Rice, bread, milk, dairy        Decaying of teeth and bones,
                               products, ﬁsh, red meat         weakness
     Potassium (K)             Fruits, vegetables, meat ,      Muscle weakness, nausea , paralysis,
                               dairy products, grains          heart failure
     Iodine(I)                 Sea foods , vegetables,         Goiter( enlarged thyroid glands)
                               iodized salt
     Sulfur (S)                Foods containing proteins       Fatigue, Impaired growth, swelling
     Chlorine (Cl) and         Table salt                      Reduced appetite, muscle cramps
     Sodium (Na)
     Magnesium (Mg)            Green leafy vegetables,         Disturbance in nervous system
                               grains
     Fluorine (F)              Tea, sea food, drinking water   Tooth decay


    Basal metabolic rate (BMR)
      • Basal metabolic rate is deﬁned as the minimum metabolic rate at rest, when in a
         post absorptive stage (at least 12 hour fasting) and is not experiencing stress.
       • BMR is measured under a “comfortable” temperature range.
       • BMR of humans averages for adult males 1,600-1,800 kcal per day and 1,300-
         1,500 kcal for adult females.


    Energy budget: An energy budget is a balance sheet of energy intake against energy
    expenditure in a particular animal. The basic model of energy budget can be shown as
    follows;
    C=M+U+F+P
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book
   Where C=Energy content in the food sources taken in
           M= Energy spent for metabolic activities
           U= Energy associated with urinary loss
           F= Energy associated with fecal loss
           P= Production (Energy available for growth and reproduction)


   In energy budgets, energy content in the food intake is compared with energy
   expenditure which includes energy spent for basal metabolism and extra activities
   (M), energy associated with excretory products namely urinary loss (U) and fecal loss
   (F). The energy differences between the energy intake and the energy expenditure
   for metabolism and excretion are available for production which includes growth
   and reproduction. Energy budget can be calculated for each animal based on energy
   measurements from ﬁeld and laboratory. Energy budgets are useful for estimating
   energy available for growth and reproduction.


   Food for healthy life: For a healthy life diet should contain correct proportions of
   carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, water, ﬁber, essential mineral elements and vitamins.
   Dietary deﬁciencies can have negative impact on health. When food intake exceeds
   daily energy requirements especially in inactive individuals can lead to ill health
   conditions specially diabetes mellitus and heart diseases. Some individuals develop
   allergic reactions to foods such as pineapple, peanuts and tomatoes. Such individuals
   should avoid these types of foods. Antioxidants present in the food material (e.g.
   vitamin C and vitamin E) are also important in avoiding disorders in the alimentary
   canal and maintaining a healthy life. As humans cannot synthesize all the required
   antioxidants some of them should be obtained from the diet.
   Malnutrition: Malnutrition can arise due to failure of obtaining an adequate nutrition
   when the diet lacks one or more essential nutrients or consistently supplies less
   chemical energy than the energy required by the body. According to the WHO if, body
   mass index (BMI) is less than 18.5 is said to be malnutrition. BMI of a person is
   calculated as follows,
   BMI= Mass/ height2 (kg/ m2)


   Obesity: Obesity arises when energy expenditure of a person is much less than the
   energy intake. According to the WHO criteria, if the BMI is at 30.0 or over it is known
   as obesity. This condition is a growing issue worldwide. Obesity can lead to many
   diseases such as diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, some cancers etc.
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Common disorders in the alimentary canal
    Gastritis: gastritis is a condition resulting inﬂammation of the stomach which can
    be due to several reasons. In gastritis, glands of the stomach wall are stimulated and
    secrete excess HCl causing damage to the mucosa. Due to the damages of mucosa
    layer of the stomach, blisters can be formed. Prolonged starvation and mental stress
    are one of the reasons for the secretion of excess HCl. some drugs like aspirin can also
    induce gastritis conditions. Longer lasting gastritis conditions is usually associated
    with the infection by the acid tolerance bacterium Helicobacter pylori. As prolonged
    starvation is one of the reasons for developing gastritis proper food habits should be
    practiced to control this condition.


    Constipation: Constipation occurs due to the slow movement of feces that promotes
    the water reabsorption and as a result feces become more solid. Inhibition of the reﬂex
    action in defecation may also leads to constipation. This leads to pain in the anus
    and difﬁculty in defecating. Constipation can be controlled by developing behavioral
    adjustments to carry out defecation properly. Intake of adequate ﬁber in the diet can
    help prevent constipation.



                       Circulatory Systems in Animals

    Need of a circulatory system
    A circulatory system is required in animals for transportation of materials within the
    body and exchange of materials with the external environment. The simple animals
    (e.g. Cnidarians, Flat worms) lack specialized system for the transport and distribution
    of material because many or all cells are in direct contact with the external environment.
    In these animals exchange of materials over the body surface through direct diffusion
    is sufﬁcient for their needs. In these animals those materials can be transported by
    diffusion through short distance within the body.
    As organisms increase in size and complexity, the amount of materials moving in and
    out of the body also increases. The distance that materials have to be transported within
    the body also increases and many cells are not in direct contact with their external
    environment. Therefore diffusion is not sufﬁcient to transport materials throughout
    the body. Therefore circulatory systems have evolved in such organisms to exchange
    materials between cells and their immediate surroundings.


Substances that are transported in the body
  Substances that are transported in the body include respiratory gases (oxygen, carbon
  dioxide), nutrients (glucose, amino acids, fatty acids, vitamins, etc.), waste products of
  metabolism (urea, ammonia, etc), hormones and antibodies.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

   Blood circulatory systems in the animal kingdom

   A circulatory system has three basic components: a muscular pumping device (heart),
   interconnected vessels and a circulatory ﬂuid (blood/ hemolymph). Circulatory ﬂuid
   ﬂows through the vessels mainly due to the pressure generated by the heart. The
   circulatory system functionally connects the ﬂuid environment of the body cells to
   the organs that exchange gases, absorb nutrients and dispose of wastes by transporting
   ﬂuids throughout the body. Various degrees of complexity in the arrangement of
   circulatory systems can be seen in the animal kingdom.


Main circulatory systems in the animal kingdom
 There are two types of circulatory systems among the animals: open circulatory system
 and closed circulatory system.


   The open circulatory system: It is a circulatory system in which a ﬂuid called
   hemolymph that bathes the tissues and organs directly. There is no distinction
   between the circulatory ﬂuid and the interstitial ﬂuid surrounding cells. The heart
   pumps hemolymph through the circulatory vessels into the spaces (interconnected
   sinuses) which surround body tissues. Chemical exchange occurs directly between
   the hemolymph and body cells. Back ﬂow of the hemolymph takes place via the pores
   (ostia) with valves found in the heart during the relaxation. The open circulatory
   system has evolved in some invertebrate phyla such as Arthropoda and Mollusca
   (some mollusc groups).




                 Fig 5.13:Circulatory system of a Grass hopper
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
    The closed circulatory system: It is a circulatory system in which blood is restricted
    to vessels and kept apart from the interstitial ﬂuid. Blood is pumped by the heart/s into
    large vessels. These large blood vessels branches into small vessels and they penetrate
    into the organs. Chemical exchange occurs between the blood and the interstitial ﬂuid
    and interstitial ﬂuid and body cells. It may contain one or more hearts. This type of
    circulatory systems can be seen in vertebrates and invertebrates such as Annelids.
    In comparison to open circulatory system enable effective delivery of oxygen and
    nutrients to the cells of larger and more active animals due to relatively high blood
    pressure.




                Fig 5.14: Closed blood Circulatory system of an Annelid


Organization of vertebrate circulatory systems: Single circulation and double
circulation
   Vertebrates have a closed circulatory system where there are three main types of
   blood vessels: arteries, veins and capillaries. Within each type blood ﬂows in only
   one direction. The blood vessels which carry blood from the heart to organs are called
   arteries. When these arteries branch into smaller vessels within organs they are called
   arterioles. They pass blood to capillaries which are microscopic vessels with thin and
   porous walls. These are the places where materials exchange occurs between blood
   and interstitial ﬂuid surrounding body cells through diffusion. Capillaries converge
   into venules and they converge into veins which carry blood back to the heart.
    Single circulation
    During single circulation, in a complete circulation through the entire body, blood
    passes through the heart only once. In animals that demonstrate single circulation,
    posses two chambers in the heart. They are atrium and ventricle.
    During a single circulation, the oxygen poor blood returning from the body enters
    atrium and pass into the ventricle. Then the ventricle is contracted, blood is pumped
    into the capillary bed in the gills. There gas exchange occurs between the capillaries
    and the external environment. The O2 is diffused into the blood while CO2 is removed
    from the blood. Next the oxygen enriched blood circulates throughout the body and
    reaches the body cells through body capillaries. e.g.: Bony ﬁshes, Cartilagenous ﬁshes
    such as rays and sharks.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                                Resource Book

   Double circulation
   During double circulation, in a complete circulation through the entire body, blood
   passes through the heart twice. Such circulatory system consists of separate pulmonary
   and systemic circuits in which blood passes through the heart after completing each
   cycle. e.g. Amphibians, Reptiles, Aves, Mammals. Amphibians and most reptiles
   have a three chambered heart: two atria and one ventricle. Birds and mammals have
   a four chambered heart where heart is completely divided into left and right sides.
   This arrangement allows the complete separation of oxygen enriched and oxygen poor
   blood. The oxygen poor blood from systemic circulation ﬂows to the right atrium of
   the heart and then to the right ventricle. Right ventricle pumps blood into the lungs.
   Oxygen enriched blood from the lungs reaches the left atrium and pass to the left
   ventricle. The left ventricle pumps oxygen enriched blood into the systemic circulation.


   Double circulation is more effective in supplying blood to all body organs and tissues
   especially brain and muscles due to the higher pressure exerted by the heart in the
   systemic circulation. This in contrast to single circulation where blood ﬂows under
   reduced pressure from the gas exchange organs to other organs.




                 Fig 5.15: Single and double circulatory systems in animals: a. Single circulation
                 (ﬁsh), b. double circulation (amphibian) c. double circulation (mammal)
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


Basic plan of human blood circulatory system and lymphatic system
  Basic plan of human blood circulatory system




                Fig 5.16: Basic plan of the human blood circulatory system


    Figure (5.16) depicts the basic plan of the human blood circulatory system. The human
    heart consists of four chambers; they are two ventricles and two atria. There is a dual
    circuit which operates simultaneously. The pulmonary circuit takes oxygen poor blood
    to the respiratory surface, the lungs and returns the oxygen enriched blood back to
    the heart while the systemic circuit supplies oxygen enriched blood to all organs and
    tissues in the body and returns oxygen poor blood from organ and tissues back to
    the heart. Each circuit consists of major arteries/ arteries, arterioles, capillary beds,
    venules and veins/major veins.
    During ventricular contraction, the right ventricle pumps the oxygen poor blood into
    the two lungs via the pulmonary arteries. Then in the lungs O2 is loaded into the blood
    through diffusion while CO2 is unloaded from blood into the external environment.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
   This process occurs in the capillary beds in the left and right lungs. Then the oxygen
   rich blood is transported into the left atrium via the two pulmonary veins. During
   atrial contraction, this oxygen rich blood is transported into the left ventricle. During
   ventricular contraction oxygen rich blood is pumped into the aorta. Through arteries
   the aorta conveys this oxygen rich blood throughout the body. First the aorta branches
   into the coronary arteries which supplies blood into the heart muscles. Then the aorta
   branches into arteries, arterioles leading to capillary beds in the head and arms and the
   capillary beds in the abdominal organs and legs. The exchange of gases occurs in the
   capillary beds where O2 rich blood is diffused into the tissues while the CO2 rich blood
   diffused into the blood capillaries. These blood capillaries rejoined to form venules
   which direct oxygen poor blood into veins. Oxygen poor blood from trunk and hind
   limbs is drained into the inferior vena cava and oxygen poor blood from the head, neck
   and fore limbs are directed into the superior vena cava. The blood from both inferior
   and superior vena cava is pumped into the right atrium where it is passed into the right
   ventricle. This blood is directed to the pulmonary circuit as explained above.


   Basic plan of human lymphatic system
   The lymphatic system is closely connected with the blood circulatory system both
   structurally and functionally. It consists of lymph vessels through which lymph
   travels. Other structure in the lymphatic system includes lymph nodes, lymphoid
   tissues (tonsils) and lymphoid organs (e.g. spleen and thymus). Lymph vessels consist
   of tiny vessels and larger vessels. Tiny lymph vessels are in close contact with the
   capillaries of the blood circulatory system. Lymph nodes are composed of connective
   tissues and white blood cells.


   The lymphatic system returns lost ﬂuid and proteins from the blood capillaries back
   into the blood. The lost ﬂuid from the blood capillaries is called lymph when they are
   inside the lymphatic system. The composition of the lymph is same as interstitial ﬂuid.
   Lymph vessels have valves. That prevents the backﬂow of the lymph. The lymph is
   drained into veins at the base of the neck via two large ducts The rhythmic contraction
   of the lymph vessel walls and skeletal muscle contraction help to move the lymph.
   The functions of human lymphatic system include tissue drainage to maintain the blood
   volume in the blood circulatory system, absorption of fat and fat soluble vitamins from
   the small intestine and for immune responses.


   Structure and function of the human heart
    The human heart is roughly a cone shaped hollow muscular organ. The heart wall is
   composed of three layers of tissues: Pericardium, Myocardium, Endocardium.
   Pericardium: The pericardium is the outer most layers. It is made up of two sacs: The
   outer ﬁbrous pericardium and inner serous pericardium.
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Myocardium: Myocardium is the middle layer of the heart wall. It is composed of
    specialized cardiac muscle found only in the heart. Running through the myocardium
    is also a network of specialized conducting ﬁbres responsible for transmitting the
    heart’s electrical signals.


    Enodocardium: Endocardium is the inner layer of the heart wall. It lines the chambers
    and valves of the heart. It is a smooth membrane and consists of ﬂattened epithelial
    cells. It is continuous with the endothelium lining of the blood vessels.




                Fig 5.17: Interior of the human heart




                Fig 5.18: External appearance of the human heart
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book


   There are four chambers in the heart two upper atria and two lower ventricles. Ventricles
   have to pump blood to the whole body where as atria pump blood to the ventricles
   only. Therefore walls of the ventricles are thicker than walls of the atria. Wall of the
   left ventricle is thicker than walls of the right ventricle because the right ventricle
   pumps blood to the lungs which are closer to the heart whereas the left ventricle has to
   pump blood throughout the body.


   Therefore the blood entering the aorta from the left ventricle is at much higher blood
   pressure than the blood entering the pulmonary artery from the right ventricle.


   The heart is completely divided into a right and left side by a septum. The atria and
   ventricles on each side are divided by an atrio-ventricular valve (AV). The right
   atrioventricular valve has three ﬂaps hence known as tricuspid valve and the left
   atrioventricular valve has two ﬂaps hence known as bicuspid valve. Conical shaped
   papillary muscles are extensions of the inner wall of the ventricles. Atrio-ventricular
   valves attached to the papillary muscles by ﬁbrous cords which are called chordae
   tendineae. Atrio-ventricular valves are anchored by strong ﬁbres. This prevents the
   valves from being turned inside out. Semilunar valves are found at the points where
   the pulmonary artery and aorta leave the right and left ventricles respectively. These
   valves prevent the backﬂow of blood into the ventricles.
   Two pulmonary arteries with oxygen poor blood leave the heart from the upper part of
   the right ventricle. Two pulmonary veins from each lung carry oxygen rich blood back
   to the left atrium. The aorta with oxygen rich blood leaves from the upper part of the
   left ventricles. The superior vena cava and inferior vena cava open into the right atrium
   and empty their contents into the right atrium. The heart is supplied with arterial blood
   by the right and left coronary arteries which branch from the aorta immediately after
   the aortic valve.


   The conducting system of the heart
   Heart generates its own electrical impulses and beats independently of nervous or
   hormonal control. However it is supplied with both sympathetic and parasympathetic
   nerve ﬁbers which increase and decrease respectively the intrinsic heart rate. In addition
   to that heart responds to a number of circulating hormones including adrenaline and
   thyroxine.
   Small group of specialized neuromuscular cells in the myocardium initiate and conduct
   impulses. The conducting system of the heart consists of following specialized system.
      • SA node (Sinoatrial node)
      • AV node (Atrioventricular node)
      • Atrioventricular bundle (bundle of His), bundle branches and Purkinje ﬁbres
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                        Fig5.19: The conducting system of the human heart
    SA node / Sinoatrial node
     SA node is a small mass of specialized cells. It lies in the myocardium of the right
    atrium near the opening of the superior vena cava. The stimulus for contraction of
    the heart originates in the ‘SA node’. The SA node initiates the heart beat and sets the
    rhythm of the heart beat so it is called the pace maker. But the heart rate can be varied
    by the stimulation from the autonomic nervous system, hormones such as adrenaline,
    thyroxine and temperature.


    AV node
    AV node is also a small mass of specialized cells. It is situated between wall of the
    left and right atria. The AV node transmits the electrical signals from the atria into the
    ventricles.


    Atrioventricular bundle (bundle of His), bundle branches and Purkinje ﬁbres
    AV bundle is a mass of ﬁbers. It originates from the AV node. The AV bundle crosses the
    ﬁbrous rings that separate atria and ventricle at the upper end of the ventricular septum
    it divides into right and left bundle branches. Within the ventricular myocardium the
    branches break up into ﬁne ﬁbres. These ﬁne ﬁbers are Purkinje ﬁbers. The AV bundle
    branches and the Purkinje ﬁbers transmit electrical impulse from the AV node to the apex
    of the myocardium. As a result of this impulse, wave of ventricular contractions begin.
    Then the contraction sweeps upwards and outwards pumping blood simultaneously
    into the pulmonary artery and the aorta.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book


   The cardiac cycle
   The cardiac cycle refers to the sequences of events that take place in a complete heart
   beat. During this process one complete cycle of pumping and ﬁlling of blood into the
   heart occurs. Complete cardiac cycle lasts for 0.8 second. It occurs as follows:
       1. Atrial systole – Contraction of the atria
       2. Ventricular systole - Contraction of the ventricles
       3. Complete cardiac diastole – Relaxation of the atria and ventricles
   At rest the healthy adult heart is likely to beat at a rate of 60- 80 beats per minute.
   During a single heart beat, the heart contracts (systole) and then relaxes (diastole).
   During a single contraction the amount of blood pumped by a ventricle is called the
   stroke volume.




                                  Fig 5.20:The stages of Cardiac cycle


   Complete cardiac diastole
   This lasts for 0.4 second. Both atria and ventricles are relaxed and blood return to the
   heart. The superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava transport oxygen poor blood
   into the right atrium. At the same time as the four pulmonary veins bring oxygen rich
   blood into the left atrium. The pressure of the atria is more than the pressure of the
   ventricles. Therefore atrioventricular valves are open and some blood ﬂows passively
   through to the ventricles.


   Atrial systole
   When blood ﬂows into the atrium SA node is stimulated. Then SA node triggers a wave
   of contractions that spreads over the myocardium of both atria. Hence the remaining
   blood in the atria ﬂows into the ventricles thereby emptying the atria. This lasts for 0.1
   second.
Resource Book                                                      G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Ventricular systole
    Through the atrial muscles the electrical impulses reaches the AV node. Then AV node
    triggers its own electrical impulses which quickly spread to the ventricular muscles
    via the AV bundle, the bundle branches, and Purkinje ﬁbers. This results in a wave of
    contractions which sweep upwards from the apex of the heart across the wall of the
    ventricles. As a result both ventricles contract.
    The pressure in the right ventricle is more than the pressure in the pulmonary artery
    and the pressure in the left ventricle is more than pressure in the aorta. Therefore
    pulmonary valve and aortic valves open and blood ﬂows into pulmonary artery and
    aorta respectively.


    The high pressure generated during ventricular contractions force the atrioventricular
    values to close preventing backﬂow of blood into the atria. Ventricular systole lasts
    for 0.3 seconds. When ventricles relax, the pressure within them falls. The pulmonary
    and aortic valves close. Pressure within the pulmonary artery and aorta is more than
    pressure within the ventricles. The valves of the heart and great vessels open and close
    according to the pressure within the chambers of the heart. The sequence of opening
    and closing of valves ensure that blood ﬂows only in one direction.

    Electrocardiogram (ECG)
    Electrical activity in the heart can be detected on the surface of the skin by placing
    electrodes on the chest or limbs as the body tissues and ﬂuids conduct electricity well.
    Such a recording is called an electrocardiogram (ECG). The ECG indicates the spread
    of the electrical signal generated by the SA node as it travels throughout the heart. The
    normal ECG tracing of a healthy individual shows ﬁve waves which by convention
    have been named P, Q, R, S and T.




                Fig 5.21: Electrocardiogram of one cardiac cycle
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book


   P wave - It represents the impulse from the SA node as it sweeps over the atria (atrial
   depolarization).


   QRS wave complex – Represents rapid spread of impulse from the AV node
   throughout the ventricles and electrical activity of the ventricular muscles.( ventricular
   depolarization)


   T wave – Represents ventricular repolarization and relaxation of the ventricular
   muscles. Due to the larger QRS complex, atrial repolarization which occurs during
   ventricular contraction is not seen.
    Information about the heart function of a person ( state of the myocardium and the
   cardiac conduction system) can be obtained by examining the pattern of waves and the
   time interval between cycles and parts of cycles.


   Blood Pressure
   The force that the blood exerts on the walls of blood vessels as it travels is referred to
   as blood pressure. Blood pressure in the arteries of systemic circulation maintains the
   essential ﬂow of blood into and out of the organs of the body.


   It is very important to keep blood pressure within normal limits. High blood pressure
   could lead to damage blood vessels resulting in formation of clots or bleeding from
   damaged sites. If the blood pressure falls too low, there will be inadequate blood ﬂow
   through tissue capillary beds. This will adversely affects the normal functioning of
   vital organs such as the brain, heart and kidneys.


   Blood pressure varies according to the time of day, the posture, gender, age, activity,
   exercise and stress (Emotional states) of an individual. Blood pressure falls at rest and
   during sleep. Blood pressure increases during excitement, fear or anxiety.


   Systolic and diastolic pressure
   Systolic pressure
    Systolic pressure is the pressure produced within the arterial system when the left
   ventricle contracts and pushes blood into the aorta. At rest , systolic pressure in a
   normal healthy adult systolic pressure is about 120 mmHg.
   Diastolic pressure
   Diastolic blood pressure is the blood pressure within the arteries following ejection of
   blood at complete cardiac diastole(when the heart is at rest. In a normal healthy adult
   diastolic pressure is about 80 mmHg.
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Arerial blood pressure is measured by a sphygmomanometer. It is expressed as
        Systolic pressure (mm Hg)
        Diastobic pressure (mm Hg)
                                              120/80 mmHg


    Hypertension and Hypotension
    Hypertension
    Sustained elevated blood pressure above normal limits is called hypertension.
    Consequences of hypertension are kidney damage, adrenal gland disorders, heart
    attack (because of the increased heart rate and cardiac contraction), stroke(caused by
    cerebral haemorrhage), damaged blood vessles which can lead to death


    Risk Factors for Hypertension
       • Obesity
       • Diabetes mellitus
       • Family history
       • Smoking
       • A sedentary life style
       • High intake of salts
       • High intake of alcohol
       • Stress
       • Deposition of low density lipoprotein (LDL) on artery walls.
    Hypotension
    Sustained reduction of blood pressure below normal limits is called hypotension.
    Hypotension usually occurs as a complication of other condition such as shock,
    Dengue hemorrhage fever, standing up suddenly from sitting or lying position, over
    bleeding/ hemorrhage condition, fasting, low nutrition etc. Low blood pressure leads
    to inadequate blood supply to the brain. Depending on the cause unconsciousness may
    be brief (fainting) or prolonged possibly causing death.


    Coronary circulation
    The heart is supplied with arterial blood by the right and left coronary arteries which
    branch from the aorta immediately distal to the aortic valve.
    The coronary arteries travel the heart wall eventually forming a vast network of
    capillaries. Most of the venous blood is collected into a number of cardiac veins that
    joins to form the coronary sinus which opens into the right atrium. The remainder
    passes directly into the heart chambers through little venous channels.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book


   Consequences of blockage of coronary arteries
   The inner lining of the arteries can be thickened and harden leading to the condition
   called atherosclerosis which occurs as a result of fatty deposits especially cholesterol
   particles. This can affect the normal blood supply to the organs and tissues.


   One or more branches of coronary arteries can be blocked due to atherosclerosis which
   can be complicated by thrombosis (blood clot). Depending on the place (s) of the block
   in the coronary arteries and the degree of blockage related parts of the heart muscle will
   be deprived of oxygen and nutrients. Hence, narrowing of the arteries leads to chest
   pain (Angina). The complete occlusion due to the blockage of one or more coronary
   arteries leads to heart attacks (Myocardial infarction) which refers to the damage or
   death of cardiac muscle tissue due to lack of adequate oxygen and nutrients. Due to
   this, heart beat rhythm may be abnormal and the heart may cease to be an effective
   pump. The other vital organs such as brain may be deprived of inadequate supply of
   oxygen rich blood and heart attack may be fatal if not treated on time.


   Stroke – Similarly blockage due to atherosclerosis or rupture of arteries supplying
   blood to the brain may cause the death of nervous tissue due to lack of oxygen and
   nutrients. This is refered to as stroke.


   Respiratory pigments
   Respiratory pigments are organic compounds which can combine with oxygen where
   the partial pressure of oxygen is high and release oxygen where partial pressure
   of oxygen is low. Since oxygen is less soluble in watery medium including blood,
   transportation of oxygen from respiratory surface to the tissues/ organs is a problem
   for complex animals. To overcome this problem animals have evolved the respiratory
   pigments.
   Different respiratory pigments can be seen in the animal kingdom:
      • Haemoglobin- present in blood of human, other vertebrate and annelids
      • Haemocyanin- present in hemolymph of arthropods and molluscs.
      • Chlorocruorin- present in the blood of many annelids
      • Haemoerythrin- present in the blood of marine invertebrates (some annelids)
      • Myoglobin- present in vertebrate muscles
   All these respiratory pigments except myoglobin transport oxygen from respiratory
   surfaces to the tissues and organs and while transporting carbon dioxide from tissue/
   organs to the respiratory surface for elimination. Myoglobin present in the muscle
   tissue has an oxygen storage function.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    Transport of respiratory gases in human blood
    Transport of oxygen
    It is the hemoglobin molecule found in the erythrocytes which is responsible for the
    transport of oxygen around the body. Hemoglobin is composed of four subunits.
    Each subunit is composed of a globin protein and the haem group. Haem groups are
    responsible for the characteristic red colour of the blood. A ferrous (iron) atom is
    located within each haem group and each of these can combine reversibly with one
    molecule of oxygen. Therefore each hemoglobin molecule can carry up to four oxygen
    molecules.
    Hb          +      4O2                   HbO8
    (Hemoglobin molecules)                  (Oxyhemoglobin)
    Combination of oxygen with hemoglobin to from oxyhemoglobin


    Transport of Carbon dioxide
    Carbon dioxide is carried by the blood in different ways.
       • As HCO3- ions in the plasma (about 70%): When CO2 diffuses into the red blood
         cells the enzyme carbonic anhydrase catalyze the combination of CO2 with
         water to form bicarbonate ( HCO3- ) and H+ ions. The HCO3- moves out of the
         erythrocytes into the plasma
       • As carbaminohemoglobin (about 23%): CO2 combined with protein group of
         hemoglobin and form carbaminohemoglobin. Therefore CO2 does not compete
         with oxygen binding sites in hemoglobin.
       • Dissolved in plasma (about 7%): as free gas.


    Composition and major functions of human blood
    Blood which is a connective tissue is composed of cells and plasma. Cellular
    components of the blood are three types namely red blood cells, white blood cells and
    platelets. ((ﬁg. 5.22) Red blood cells, leukocytes and platelets are developed from the
    bone marrow in the bones such as ribs, vertebrae, sternum and pelvis. Erythropoietin
    hormone (from kidneys) stimulates the generation of red blood cells.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                       Resource Book




                 Fig 5.22: The composition of blood


   Red blood cells (erythrocytes)
   They are small biconcave disk-like cells. Mature erythrocytes lack nuclei. This
   character helps to carry more hemoglobin molecules within the cell. They also lack
   mitochondria thus they produce ATP via anaerobic respiration. If they produce ATP by
   aerobic respiration that will reduce the O2 transport efﬁciency. They have about 120
   days of life span.
    Generally a micro liter of blood contains 4- 6 million red blood cells. This ﬁgure can
   be varied depending on the gender and health status.
   Main function of red blood cells is the transportation of O2 molecules. They also
   transport CO2 molecules.


   White blood cells (Leukocytes)
   There are ﬁve types of leukocytes. They are Basophils, Lymphocytes, Eosinophils,
   Neutrophils and monocytes. Main functions of leukocytes are body defense, phagocytic
   engulﬁng and digesting microorganisms. Lymphocytes develop into T cells and B
   cells. These cells increase immune response against foreign substances.
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Platelets
    Platelets are derived from bone marrow cells. They also do not have nuclei and they
    play a major role in blood clotting.



    Blood plasma
    Blood plasma consists of inorganic ions in dissolved forms, plasma proteins such as
    albumin, antibodies and ﬁbrinogen, nutrients, metabolic wastes, respiratory gases and
    hormones. pH of human blood is around 7.4. Protein concentration in plasma is higher
    than in interstitial ﬂuid.
    The dissolved ions in the plasma buffer and maintain the osmotic balance in the blood.
    Albumin in the plasma also buffers the blood and antibodies are involved in defense.
    Fibrinogen in the plasma aids in blood clotting. When the clotting factors are removed
    from the plasma it is called as serum.
    Major Functions of blood
       • Transport of oxygen to organs and removal of carbon dioxide from the organs
         and tissues
       • Transport of soluble excretory materials to organs of excretion
       • Transport of nutrients
       • Transport of hormones from the glands where they are produced to target organs
       • Defence against foreign invasions
       • Aids in osmoregulation


    Blood clotting


    When a tissue is damaged, blood ﬂows from it and coagulates to form a blood clot.
    This prevents further blood loss and entry of pathogenic micro organisms which is of
    clear survival value. In general the blood in undamaged vessels does not clot.
    A highly complex series of reactions takes place in order for coagulation to occur as
    well as prevent unwanted clotting. When the blood vessel is damaged the connective
    tissues of the vessel wall is exposed. Therefore platelets in the blood adhere to the
    collagen ﬁbers in the connective tissue and release substance that makes close by
    platelets sticky. This platelet plug provides instant protection against blood loss.
    Then platelets release clotting factors. They trigger the formation of thrombin. Then
    thrombin converts ﬁbrinogen into ﬁbrin. Next this ﬁbrin aggregates into threads that
    form a network of the clot. The activated thrombin is also involved in formation of
    more thrombin which completes the formation of blood clot.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

   The cascade reaction during blood clotting is given below;




   Clotting does not occur in undamaged blood vessels because the lining of the vessels
   is very smooth and does not promote platelet aggregation or cell rupture. Also some
   substances such as Heparin prevent clotting. Heparin prevent the conversion of
   prothrombin into thrombin and ﬁbrinogen to ﬁbrin and is widely used clinically as an
   anticoagulant.


   Grouping of blood
   The surface of the red blood cells carries antigens called aggulitinogen (antigen A
   and antigen B). In addition individuals have antibodies in plasma (anti–A and anti-B).
   According to ABO blood grouping system there are four blood groups namely A, B, AB
   and O. A person with a speciﬁc antigen in red cells does not possess the corresponding
   antibody in the plasma. e.g. Anyone with antigen A on the red blood cell membrane
   has no anti–A antibody in the plasma.
   If red blood cells have antigen A and plasma has antibodies b (anti-B) that person’s
   blood group is A
   If red blood cells have antigen B and plasma with antibodies a (anti–A ) that person’s
   blood group is B
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
     If red blood cells have both antigen ‘A’ and ‘B’ and plasma has no anti-A or anti- B
    antibodies that person’s blood group is ‘AB’
     If red blood cells have no antigen A or B but plasma has both antibodies (anti–A and
    anti-B) that person’s blood group is ‘O’
    When a patient receives a blood transfusion it is vital that they receive blood that is
    compatible with their own. If it is incompatible a type of immune response occurs.
    This is because the donor’s red cell membranes possess glycoprotein which act as
    antigens and react with antibodies (agglutinin) in the recipient’s plasma. The result is
    that the donor’s cells are agglutinated.
    Therefore when transfusion occurs it is important to know blood group of donor and
    recipient. People with blood group AB make neither anti–A nor– Anti-B antibodies.
    Transfusion of type A, B or AB blood into these individuals is likely to be safe since
    there are no antibodies to react with them. Person with AB blood group is known as
    a universal recipient.
    Individual with blood group O has neither antigen A nor antigen B on their plasma
    membrane of red blood cells. but they do have antibodies (anti–A and anti-B) in their
    plasma. So these individuals having blood group O can donate blood to the persons
    with any blood group. A person with the blood group O is known as a universal donor.
    Therefore prior to transfusion cross-matching is still required to ensure that there is no
    reaction between donor and recipient blood.


    The Rhesus system
    Some individuals have antigen called Rhesus factor on the plasma membrane of red
    blood cells. Individuals having this factor on the red blood cells are called Rh+ and
    those who do not have this factor are called Rh-.
    Rh+ individuals do not have anti Rhesus antibodies in the plasma while individuals
    who are Rh- have anti-Rhesus antibodies in their plasma. However if Rh + blood enters
    a Rh- negative individual the recipient responds by manufacturing Rh antibodies in
    the blood plasma.


    When a Rh- mother bears a Rhesus positive (Rh+) child during delivery few Rh+ red
    blood cells of the fetus may enter the mother’s circulation and cause the mother to
    produce Rh antibodies in her plasma. If the mother is pregnant for the second time
    with a Rhesus positive fetus, the Rh antibodies developed in her plasma in response
    to the ﬁrst child’s red blood sells can pass across the placenta to the fetus and destroy
    fetal red cells. Normally Rh antibodies are not formed in large enough quantities in the
    mother’s plasma to affect the ﬁrst born child. However subsequent Rh+ children can
    suffer destruction of their red blood cells.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

                             Gas exchange in animals

   Need of respiratory structures in animals and evolution of complexity of
   respiratory structures in different animal groups

   Respiratory gas exchange (uptake of oxygen into the body and release of carbon dioxide
   into the external environment) occurs by diffusion. In simple animals e.g. cnidarians
   and ﬂat worms every cell in the body is close enough to the external environment so
   that gas exchange can occur directly between all cells and the environment. Diffusion
   through body surface is adequate as these animals have a simple body form and low
   energy requirement.


   In large animals, body complexity and energy requirement is high and the bulk of
   the cells in the body lack immediate access to the external environment. Hence, gas
   exchange through the body surface is not adequate to full ﬁll their energy requirements.
   As a result, specialized surfaces referred to as respiratory surfaces have evolved where
   gaseous exchange occurs.


   With the increase of the body size and complexity the surface area to volume ratio
   (A/V) of animals decreases. However, a large surface area is required for efﬁcient gas
   exchange and thus diverse respiratory structures with large surface area with folding
   and branching has evolved for efﬁcient gas exchange. Examples for such respiratory
   structure are Gills, Trachea, and lungs. External projections of the body such as gills
   were evolved in aquatic animals for efﬁcient extraction of dissolved oxygen from
   water. On the other hand, surface invaginations like trachea and lungs were evolved in
   terrestrial animals for efﬁcient extraction of oxygen from the atmosphere.


   Characteristics of respiratory surfaces
   An effective respiratory surface must have the following properties.
      • It must be permeable, and wet so that gases can pass through by dissolving.
      • It must be thin because diffusion is only efﬁcient over short distances.
      • It should possess a large surface area to allow a sufﬁcient volume of gases to be
        exchanged according to the organism’s need.
      • It should possess a good blood supply (maintain a steep diffusion gradient)


   Respiratory structures in animals
      • Body surface: Cnidarians, Flatworms, Earthworms
      • Gills
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology
         • External Gills: marine annelids
         • Internal Gills: Fish, shrimps, prawns
       • Tracheal systems: Insects
       • Lungs: Mammals (Human), Reptiles, Birds.
       • Skin: Amphibians
       • Book lungs: Spiders, Scorpions


Human Respiratory System
    Gross structure and function of the human respiratory system

    Human respiratory system consists of the following major parts: nostrils, nasal cavity,
    pharynx, larynx, a series of branching ducts starting from the trachea, two bronchi
    one leading to each lung and smaller bronchioles, which ﬁnally end in air sacs called
    alveoli. The bronchioles and the alveoli are contained within the paired, cone-shaped
    lungs located in the thoracic cavity. The two lungs differ slightly in shape and size.
    The left lung is slightly smaller than the right because the apex of the heart is slightly
    to the left of the median plane and it has 2 lobes while the right lung has 3 lobes. Each
    lung is surrounded by two membranes. The inner membrane, called the visceral pleura
    adheres to the outer surface of the lungs while the outer membrane called the parietal
    pleura adheres to the wall of the thoracic cavity. Between these two membranes there
    is a thin, ﬂuid ﬁlled space.


    During respiration, air enters the respiratory system through the nostrils. In the nasal
    cavity air is ﬁltered by hairs and is warmed and humidiﬁed as it travels through spaces
    in the nasal cavity. The nasal cavity leads to the pharynx which is a common passage
    for both air and food. That means air passage and food passage cross each other.
    During swallowing of food the larynx moves upwards which allows the epiglottis
    to close the opening of the larynx called the glottis. This allows food to go down the
    esophagus to the stomach. The rest of the time the glottis is open so that air can move
    from the pharynx through the larynx to the trachea. In the larynx are vocal cords which
    are made up of largely elastic ﬁbers. These vocal cords help produce sound when
    expired air rushes across the stretched or tensed vocal cords, causing them to vibrate.
    Both the walls of the larynx and trachea are strengthened by cartilage that help these
    airways to keep open. The air passes from the trachea into the two bronchi that lead
    into each lung. Within the lungs the air passes through smaller and smaller branches of
    the bronchi called bronchioles.
    The epithelium found in the major branches of this respiratory tract has cilia and a thin
    ﬁlm of mucus. The mucus helps trap the dust and other particulate contaminants in the
    inhaled air. Then the beating of cilia moves this mucus upwards towards the pharynx
    where it is swallowed into the esophagus. This process is referred to as the “mucus
    escalator”. It helps clean the respiratory system.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book

   At the tips of tiniest bronchioles are large number of small air sacs clustered together.
   The air passes into these air sacs called alveoli where gas exchange occurs. The walls
   of the alveoli are made up of a single layer of ﬂattened epithelial cells that lack cilia.
   This inner lining of the alveoli is coated by a thin ﬁlm of ﬂuid. The lungs contain
   millions of alveoli. This allows a large surface area for gas exchange. Each alveolus is
   also surrounded by a network of capillaries. Oxygen in the air that enters the alveoli
   dissolves in the moist ﬁlm and rapidly diffuse across the thin epithelium into the
   capillaries. Meanwhile a net diffusion of carbon dioxide occurs from the capillaries
   into the alveoli. Since there are no cilia in the alveoli, there are white blood cells
   in the alveoli to engulf foreign particles. Alveoli are also coated with a surfactant
   that reduces the surface tension thereby preventing the collapse of alveoli due to high
   surface tension.




                 Fig 5.23: Gross structure of human respiratory system




                 Fig 5.24: The alveoli and their capillary network
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Mechanism of ventilation of the lungs
       • Ventilation of the lungs is necessary to maintain high oxygen and low carbon
         dioxide concentrations in the alveoli or the gas exchange surface.
       • Ventilation is accomplished by breathing, which is the alternating movement of
         air into (inhalation) and out of (exhalation) the lungs.
       • Humans employ what is referred to as negative pressure breathing where air is
         pulled rather than pushed into lungs.
       • Inhalation is an active process. Contraction of rib muscles or intercoastal muscles
         and the diaphragm which is a sheet of skeletal muscle that forms the bottom of
         the thoracic cavity leads to the expansion of the thoracic cavity.
       • The visceral and parietal pleurae surrounding the lung stick together due to
         the surface tension of the ﬂuid between these two membranes. This allows the
         two membranes to slide smoothly past each other. Hence, as the volume of the
         thoracic cavity increases, the lung volume increases as well.
       • As a result, the pressure within the lungs decrease relative to the outside air.
       • This creates a pressure gradient between the atmosphere and the lungs.
       • Thus, air ﬂows from a high pressure gradient in the atmosphere to a lower
         pressure gradient in the lungs.
       • During exhalations which is usually a passive process, the rib muscles and the
         diaphragm relax. This cause the volume of the thoracic cavity to reduce.
       • As a result, the pressure inside the lungs increase in relation to the air outside.
         This pressure forces air to move out of the lungs through the respiratory tubes
         into the atmosphere.
       • When a man is at rest contraction of rib muscles and contraction of diaphragm
         are enough for breathing.
       • However, depending on the activity level, additional muscles may be used to aid
         breathing such as muscles of the neck, back and chest. These muscles further
         help to increase the volume of the thoracic cavity by raising the rib cage. e.g.
         during exercise
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                               Resource Book




                 Fig 5.25: (A) Muscles involved in respiration; (B) and (C) Changes in chest volume
                 during inspiration and expiration


      • The lungs serve as an efﬁcient respiratory surface because:
      • Alveoli create a large surface area for gas exchange.
      • Alveoli and capillary walls are both lined by simple squamous epithelia which
        reduce the distance the gasses need to travel by diffusion.
      • The alveoli surface is moist to dissolve respiratory gasses for diffusion.
      • Alveoli are highly vascularized which enables the maintenance of a steep
        diffusion gradient of respiratory gasses


   Gas exchange at the alveoli and in the tissues is a continuous process. It requires
   transport of O2 from the lungs to the blood and movement of CO2 from the blood
   (referred to as external respiration) and movement of O2 from blood to the tissues and
   CO2 from tissues to the blood (referred to as internal respiration).
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Diffusion of O2 and CO2 requires partial pressure gradients between the alveolar air in
    the lungs and blood (during external respiration) and blood and tissues (during internal
    respiration).


    During inhalation, fresh air mixes with the stale air in the lungs. This mixture in
    the lungs has a higher partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) and a lower partial pressure
    of carbon dioxide (PCO2) than the blood in the alveolar capillaries. There is thus a
    concentration gradient favoring the diffusion of these two gases in opposite directions.
    Net diffusion of O2 takes place from the air in the alveoli to the blood and net diffusion
    of CO2 takes place from the blood into the alveoli.


    When O2 molecules diffuses into blood capillaries they bind to heamoglobin in the red
    blood cells. Four molecules of O2 bind reversibly with one molecule of haemoglobin
    and form oxyhaemoglobin.


    Hb + 4 O2                                HbO8


    When blood leaves the alveolar capillaries the oxygen and carbon dioxide partial
    pressures are in equilibrium with those of alveoli air. Once this blood returns to the
    heart, it is pumped through the systemic circuit.


    Blood reaching the tissues in the systemic capillaries have a higher PO2 and a lower
    PCO2 than in the tissues. These partial pressure gradients result in the net diffusion
    of O2 from the blood stream into the tissue and CO2 diffusion from the cells into the
    blood stream across the extracellular ﬂuid/interstitial ﬂuid. This is called unloading of
    O2 and loading of CO2 . Then the blood returns to heart and pumped to lungs again.




         Fig 5.26: External respiration                Fig 5.27:Internal respiration
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book




                 Fig 5.28: Loading and unloading of respiratory gases


   Homeostatic control of Breathing
      • Typically breathing is regulated by involuntary mechanisms. These involuntary
        mechanisms help coordinate gas exchange with blood circulation and metabolic
        demands
      • Medulla oblongata is the main breathing regulating center found at the base
        brain. There are a pair of breathing control centers found in medulla and they are
        responsible for regulating the breathing rhythm.
      • A negative-feedback mechanism is involved in regulating this process. Sensors
        which detect stretching of the lung tissues are found in the lungs. During
        inhalation, these sensors send nerve impulses to the neurons that act as control
        circuits in the medulla and further inhalation is inhibited and this prevents the
        lungs from over expanding.
      • To regulate breathing, the medulla depends on pH changes in tissue ﬂuids. The
        pH of tissue ﬂuid is an indicator of blood carbon dioxide concentration. For
Resource Book                                                  G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

          example, when metabolic activities increase, the concentration of CO2 in the
          blood increases. Because CO2 diffuse into the cerebrospinal ﬂuid, this results in
          an increase of CO2 concentration in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid as well. There CO2
          reacts with water and form carbonic acid (H2CO3). H2CO3 dissociate into HCO3-
          and H+


            CO2 + H2O                            H2CO3               HCO3- + H+


       • Hence, a high CO2 concentration results in an increase in H+ concentration,
         thereby a lower pH.
       • This pH change is detected by the sensors in the medulla and in major blood
         vessels called arteries and aorta.
       • Sensors in the medulla and major blood vessels detect this decrease in pH. In
         response, the control circuits in medulla increase the depth and rate of breathing
         until the excess CO2 is removed in exhaled air and the pH of blood comes to its
         normal value which is 7.4
       • The O2 level has little inﬂuences on the breathing control centers. But, when O2
         concentration becomes very low, O2 sensors found in the aorta and the carotid
         arteries send impulses to the medulla to increase the breathing rate.
       • The regulation of breathing is also modulated by additional neural circuits in the
         pons, a part of the brain stem found above the medulla.




                Fig5.29: Homeostatic control of breathing
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

   Disorders of the respiratory system
   The effect of smoking on the smooth functioning of the respiratory system
      • Cigarette smoke harms nearly every organ in the body including the organs
        of the respiratory system and increase the risk of illness, disability and death.
        Smokers inhale large number of chemicals which mainly come from burning
        tobacco. Some of these inhaled compounds are chemically active and can trigger
        damaging changes in the body.
      • Nicotine is among the compounds inhaled in tobacco smoke which is the
        addictive drug in the smoke. It temporarily increases the rate of heart beat and
        constriction of peripheral blood vessels causing a temporary increase in blood
        pressure.
      • Cigarette smoke stimulates the secretion of mucus by the goblet cells and inhibits
        the action of cilia in the respiratory tract causing accumulation of mucus in
        bronchioles and blocking them, leading to bronchial inﬂammation or bronchitis.
        As a result, breathing may become difﬁcult.
      • Some chemicals such as hydrogen cyanide in cigarette smoke stops the cilia
        from working properly. Due to loss of action of cilia, dust and other particulate
        matter get collected in the lung, resulting in an increase in phagocytic cells in
        the lung tissue. Due to release of large amounts of lytic enzymes by these cells,
        the alveolar tissue is destroyed thus reducing the effective area available for gas
        exchange.
      • Carbon monoxide (CO) present in tobacco smoke is absorbed into the blood
        and is able to bind to hemoglobin better than oxygen and combines irreversibly
        with hemoglobin. Thus it decreases the amount of oxyhaemoglobin produced.
        Therefore, oxygen transport through blood is decreased.
      • Tobacco smoke also contains a large number of cancer-causing substances
        (carcinogens). Nearly 90% of lung cancers are due to smoking. Long term
        exposure to such chemicals in cigarette smoke results in the proliferation of cells
        in the bronchial epithelium, forming a mass of abnormal cells. A cancer may
        develop among these cells. If these cells break free, the cancer may spread to
        other parts of the lungs and or to other organs.
      • Passive or second hand smoking will also result in the above mentioned ill
        effects.


   Silicosis
   This may be caused by long-term exposure to dust containing silica compounds. High
   risk industries are,


      • Quarrying granite, slate, sandstone
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

       • Mining hard coal, gold, tin, copper
       • Stone masonry and sand blasting
       • Glass and pottery work
    When silica particles are inhaled they accumulate in the alveoli. These particles are
    ingested by macrophages, some of which remain in the alveoli and come out in to the
    connective tissue around bronchioles and blood vessels close to the pleura. Progressive
    ﬁbrosis is stimulated which eventually obliterates the blood vessels and respiratory
    bronchioles. Gradual destruction of lung tissue eventually leads to pulmonary
    hypertension and heart failure.


    Asbestos related diseases - Asbestosis
    Those who are involved in making or using products containing asbestos are at risk.
    This occurs when asbestos ﬁbers are inhaled with dust. In spite of their large size
    the particles penetrate the level of respiratory bronchioles and alveoli. Macrophages
    accumulate in the alveoli and the shorter asbestos ﬁbers are ingested. The larger ﬁbers
    are surrounded by macrophages, protein materials and iron deposits. The macrophages
    that have engulfed ﬁbers move out of the alveoli and accumulate around respiratory
    bronchioles and blood vessels, stimulating the formation of ﬁbrous tissue. These cause
    progressive destruction of lung tissue and pulmonary hypertension.


    Lung cancer
    Nearly 90% of lung cancer is due to smoking. When one smokes, the nasal hairs, mucus
    and cilia in the respiratory tract that otherwise is sufﬁcient to protect the lung from
    chemical and biological irritants, are overwhelmed and eventually stop functioning.
    As a result, irritants, free radicals, carcinogens and pathogens accumulate in the lungs.
    Eventually these cause lung cancer.


    Tuberculosis (TB)
    Tuberculosis is an infectious disease caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium
    tuberculosis. The bacterium spreads when an infected person coughs and the bacterium
    enters the body of an uninfected person through inhaled air. The most common form is
    Pulmonary TB which affects the lungs. Other organs may also be affected. Transmission
    of pulmonary TB is by inhaling the bacterium into the lungs. This bacterium can survive
    in the air and in the house dust for long periods. Malnutrition and other infectious can
    reduce resistance to the disease.
    Symptoms
    Loss of appetite, loss of weight, excessive sweating, fever, a racking cough and spitting
    up blood.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

   Asthma
   Asthma is characterized by wheezing and chest tightness causing breathing difﬁculty.
   This is caused by the sudden contractions of smooth muscles in the walls of the
   bronchioles which causes the bronchioles to narrow or even close. During this time
   breathing causes whistling or wheezing sound. The cause of asthma is an over reaction
   of an immune response to stimuli like pollen, dust, mites, spores, particular food, cold
   air, exercise, smoking gases. Anti-inﬂammatory drugs help control.


   Respiratory cycle and lung volumes and capacities
   Inhalation and exhalation during a single breath is referred to as a respiratory cycle.
   The amount of air that ﬂows in and out of the lungs depends on the conditions of
   inspiration and expiration. Thus, four respiratory volumes are described.


      • Tidal volume (TV): This is the volume of air inhaled and exhaled with each
        breath during normal breathing. On average it is about 500 ml in a resting adult
        human.
      • Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV): This is the extra volume of air that can be
        forcibly inhaled beyond the tidal volume.
      • Expiratory reserve volume (ERV): The extra volume of air which can be
        expelled from the lungs after a tidal expiration.
      • Residual volume (RV): The volume of air that remains in the lungs even after
        forceful expiration. This is on average is about 1,200 ml.


   Speciﬁc combinations of respiratory volumes are called respiratory capacities. Thus,
   respiratory capacities always consist of two or more lung volumes. The respiratory
   capacities are important to determine the respiratory status of a person.
      • Inspiratory capacity (IC): The total volume of air that can be inspired after a
        tidal expiration.
        Thus, IC = TV + IRV
      • Functional residual capacity (FRC): The volume of air remaining in the lungs
        at the end of a tidal expiration.
                Thus, FRC = RV + ERV
      • The functional residual capacity is important for continuous exchange of gas in
        the alveoli and to prevent the collapse of the alveoli during expiration.
      • Vital capacity (VC): The maximum volume of air which can be inhaled and
        exhaled. It is normally around 3100 mL in women and 4800 mL in men.
          VC = TV + IRV + ERV
Resource Book                                                G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


       • Total lung capacity (TLC): The maximum volume of air the lungs can hold or
         the sum of all lung volumes. This is normally around 6000 mL.


    In addition, some of the inspired air ﬁlls the system of branching conducting tubes
    (trachea, bronchi and bronchioles) and never contributes to the gas exchange in the
    alveoli. This volume is referred to as the anatomical dead space and it is typically
    about 150 mL.




                Fig 5.30: Lung volumes and capacities


    IRV: Inspiratory reserve volume
    IC: Inspiratory capacity
    FRC: Functional residual capacity
    ERV: Expiratory reserve volume
    RV: residual volume
    VC: Vital capacity
    TLC: Total lung capacity
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book



                                      Immunity

   The state of being resistance to injury, invading pathogens and foreign substances
   through defensive mechanisms in the body is known as immunity. Pathogens which
   are the agents that can cause infectious diseases include some bacteria, virus, and
   fungi. The substances that can be recognized as foreign to the body include chemical
   components of pollen grains, incompatible blood cells and transplanted tissues.
   Defenses in the animal body against these foreign invasions make up the immune
   system. Immune system of animals should be able to distinguish own body cells (self)
   from foreign cells/particles within the body (non-self) for initiating defensive immune
   responses for destruction of the foreign agents such as pathogens. Special cell types
   in the body ﬂuid and tissues of most animals can interact with these foreign invasions
   and destroy them. Immune cells produce receptor molecules that bind speciﬁcally to
   molecules from foreign cells and agents and activate defense responses.


   Immune responses in animals can be divided into two types:
      • Innate immunity
      • Acquired immunity (Adaptive immunity)


   Innate immunity
   Innate immunity is the ability to resist damage or diseases in the body through inherent
   body defenses which offer rapid responses against a broad range of pathogens and
   foreign substances. In innate immunity, recognition and defense responses will
   depend on characters common to groups of pathogens. Innate immunity lacks speciﬁc
   responses to speciﬁc invaders and its protective mechanisms functions the same way
   regardless of the type of the invader. Hence innate immunity is also known as non-
   speciﬁc defense. Innate immune responses include defense mechanisms that provide
   immediate but general protection against foreign invasion. Innate immunity is found in
   both invertebrates and vertebrates. Innate defense mechanisms can be broadly divided
   into two types: External barriers (External defenses/ barrier defense) and Internal
   nonspeciﬁc defenses (Internal defenses).


   External defenses/ barrier defense in innate immunity
   External barriers discourage pathogens and foreign substances from penetrating the
   body. So they are considered as the ﬁrst line of defense. For innate immunity in the
   human body, external defenses/barriers are found in the skin, mucus membranes and
   secretions of various organs. They act as physical and chemical barriers.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology



       • Human skin with its many layers of closely packed, keratinized cell layers in
         the epidermis provides a signiﬁcant physical barrier to entrance of microbes. In
         addition periodic shedding of epidermal cells helps remove microbes from the
         skin surface.
       • The mucous membranes which line the body cavities provide a physical barrier
         to entrance of many microbes (e.g. the linings of the respiratory tract, digestive
         tract, urinary tract and reproductive tract). The mucous membranes produce
         mucus which traps microbes and other particles. In the respiratory tract, ciliated
         epithelial cells sweep mucus and any entrapped material upward. Coughing and
         sneezing speed up the mucus movement and its entrapped pathogens out of the
         body preventing their entry to the lungs.
       • Secretions by various organs (e.g. tears, saliva, mucus) help as physical and
         chemical barriers to protect epithelial surface of the skin and mucous membranes.
         Tears in the eyes provide protection against irritants and microbes. Tears in
         the eyes provide continuous washing action that helps to dilute microbes and
         prevent settling on the surface of eyes. Saliva washes microbes from the mouth
         surface and the ﬂow of saliva reduces the colonization of microbes in the mouth.
         Mucus secretions which bathe various exposed epithelia provide a continual
         washing action to dilute and inhibit colonization microbes such as bacteria and
         fungi. Lysozyme (an enzyme) present in tears, saliva, perspiration and mucous
         secretions can destroy cell walls of some bacteria. Gastric juice which provides
         an acidic environment in the stomach can destroy many bacteria and bacterial
         toxins ingested with food. Secretions of the sweat and sebaceous glands of the
         skin give acidity of the skin which helps to prevent growth of bacteria.


    Internal defenses in Innate immunity
    When the pathogens penetrate the external defensive barriers in the skin and mucus
    membranes in the human body, they encounter a second line of innate immunity
    responses called internal defenses. Within the body, detection of non-self is
    accomplished by molecular recognition in which receptor molecules on speciﬁc cells
    in the immune system will bind speciﬁcally to molecules of foreign agents such as
    pathogens.
    In innate immunity, internal defenses consist of Phagocytic cells, Natural killer cells,
    Antimicrobial proteins and Inﬂammatory responses.
       • Phagocytic cells: These are specialized cells that can ingest microbes, foreign
         particles and cell debris for intra cellular digestion and destruction. Phagocytes
         use the receptor molecules to detect components of foreign agents and particles.
         Neutrophils and Macrophages are the two main types of phagocytic cells in man.
         While circulating in the blood, neutrophils are attracted ﬁrst to the infected site
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
         by signals from affected tissues. Then neutrophils can ingest and destroy infected
         pathogens. Macrophages are larger and more potent phagocytic cells.
      • Natural killer cells: These are a type of lymphocytes present in the blood and
        some tissue/organs such as spleen and lymph nodes which function in nonspeciﬁc
        defense. They can detect the cells with abnormal surface molecules (e.g. virus-
        infected body cells and some cancerous cells) and kill them. Natural killer cells
        do not engulf these abnormal cells but upon binding they can release chemicals
        to kill the virus-infected cells and cancerous cells which could inhibit further
        spread of the virus or cancer.
      • Antimicrobial proteins: They are proteins present in the blood and interstitial ﬂuids
        which function in innate defense by attacking microbes directly or impeding their
        reproduction. Interferons and Complement proteins are two such antimicrobial
        proteins that discourage microbial growth. Interferons are proteins secreted by
        virus-infected body cells that protect uninfected host cells from viral infections
        by interfering with the viral replication. Once released by virus-infected cells,
        interferons diffuse to uninfected neighboring cells where they are stimulated to
        produce “anti-viral proteins” which inhibit viral replication. Some interferons
        activate macrophages which enhance the phagocytic activity. Complement
        proteins are a group of normally inactive proteins in the blood plasma and
        plasma membranes. When they are activated by different substances present
        on the surfaces of microbes, a cascade of biochemical reaction occurs which
        lead to lysis of invaded cells. They also promote phagocytosis and inﬂammatory
        response.


      • Inﬂammatory response: This is an innate immune defense response in the
        body to tissue damage triggered by microbial infections or injury of the tissues.
        This involves the release of substances that promote increased permeability
        and dilation of blood vessels, enhance migration of phagocytes, destruction of
        invading pathogens and aid in tissue repair (Figure 5.31). Inﬂammation attempts
        to destroy the microbes at the site of the injury preventing the spread to other
        tissues and promote tissue repair.


   Inﬂammatory response is brought about by various signaling molecules upon infection
   or injury. Histamine is one of the important inﬂammatory signaling molecules released
   mainly by mast cells in the connective tissues at the site of damage. Histamine causes
   increased permeability and dilation of nearby blood vessels (blood capillaries).
   Increased permeability of the blood vessels enhance the inﬁltration of white blood
   cells, antimicrobial proteins and clotting elements to enter the injured area from the
   blood that aid in destruction of invading pathogens and tissue repair. Dilation of blood
   vessels allows more blood to ﬂow through the damage area which helps to remove
   dead cells. Activated phagocytes (macrophages and neutrophils) moved from the
Resource Book                                                     G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    blood to the damaged tissue area can also discharge signaling molecules (cytokines)
    which also promote blood ﬂow to the injured or infected site. During inﬂammation,
    activated complement proteins can cause further histamine release which attracts more
    phagocyte cells to enter injured tissue and carry out additional phagocytosis. This
    process can digest the microbes and cell debris at the site of injury.


    Signs and symptoms of inﬂammation are redness, heat, swelling and pain. Dilation of
    blood vessels causes redness and heat production due to high metabolism in the area.
    Increased permeability of blood vessels triggers localized swelling due to leaking of
    tissue ﬂuid into neighboring tissues. Pain results from injury to neurons and microbial
    toxins. As a result of most inﬂammatory responses, pus may be accumulated. It is a
    ﬂuid rich in dead phagocytes, dead pathogens and cell debris from the damaged tissue.
    Minor injury or infection causes a localized inﬂammatory response. If the injury or
    infection is severe it may lead to a systemic response (throughout the body) leading
    to fever. Elevated body temperature within limits may enhance the phagocytosis and
    accelerate tissue repair by speeding up the chemical reactions.




                 Fig 5.31: Major events in inﬂammatory response
    Acquired Immunity (Adaptive Immunity)
    Acquired immunity is the ability of the body to defend itself against invading foreign
    agents (e.g. pathogens) through speciﬁc defense responses mediated by diverse
    T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes. Acquired immunity shows (i) speciﬁcity for
    particular foreign molecules (ii) recognition of animals own molecules (self-molecules)
    from non-self-molecules and (iii) memory for most previously encountered pathogens
    such that the subsequent encounter causes a stronger and more rapid response
    (immunological memory). In the animal kingdom, acquired immunity is found only in
    the vertebrates.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                               Resource Book


   The cells that have developed the ability to carry out acquired immune responses if
   they are activated against foreign agents are called T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes.
   In man, both types of lymphocytes are originated from stem cells in the bone
   marrow. Some of the lymphocytes that migrate to thymus for maturation are called T
   lymphocytes (T cells). The lymphocytes that remain in the bone marrow for completion
   of development are called B lymphocytes (B cells). Before leaving these lymphocytes
   to the secondary lymphatic tissues, their plasma membranes acquire diverse speciﬁc
   protein receptors (antigen receptors) which have the ability to recognize speciﬁc
   foreign invasions (There can be over 100,000 antigen receptors on the surface of a
   single B lymphocyte or T lymphocyte)


   An antigen is a substance that has the ability to stimulate an immune response through
   T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes and to react with the speciﬁc cells or antibodies
   that resulted from the stimulated immune response. Viral proteins, bacterial toxins
   and chemical components of bacterial structures such as ﬂagella and cell walls can be
   antigenic. Structural components of incompatible blood cells, transplanted tissues can
   also be antigenic. Antigens are usually large foreign molecules such as proteins and
   polysaccharides. In general not the entire antigen, but certain parts of a large antigen
   molecule act as the triggers for the acquired immune responses. The small accessible
   portion of the antigen that binds to a speciﬁc antigen receptor of a T lymphocyte or
   B lymphocyte is called an epitope (for exp a group of amino acids in a large protein).
   Can serve as an epitofo. Usually a single antigen has several epitopes (Figure 5.32)
   each can bind with a speciﬁc antigenic receptor of the single T or B lymphocyte.




                 Figure 5.32: (a). Mature T lymphocyte and mature B lymphocyte with antigen
                 receptors on the plasma membrane, (b). B cell receptor binds with an Epitope on
                 antigen
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology



    In acquired immunity, two types of immune responses are mediated by
    T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes. They are Cell mediated immune responses and
    Humoral immune responses. Humoral immune response is also called as Antibody
    mediated immune response. Both immune responses are triggered by antigens. A given
    pathogen may provoke both types of immune responses.


    Cell mediated immune response
    Cell mediated immune response is a type of acquired immunity in which speciﬁcally
    sensitized T lymphocytes attach to the antigen undergo proliferation and eventually
    differentiate into “Cytotoxic T cells” that can directly kill the cells with the invading
    antigen . In addition “Memory T cells” are formed that can cause stronger and more
    rapid response at the subsequent encounter of the same antigen to the body. This is
    particularly effective against infected cells (fungi, parasites and virus that are present
    within host cells), some cancer cells and foreign transplanted cells. Cell mediated
    immunity always involves cells attacking cells.


    Humoral immune response
    Humoral immune response is a type of acquired immunity in which speciﬁcally
    sensitized B lymphocytes attach to a particular antigen undergo proliferation and
    eventually differentiate into “Plasma cells” that secrete circulating antibodies that can
    neutralize and inactivate the speciﬁc toxins and pathogens in the blood and lymph. In
    addition “Memory B cells” are formed that can cause stronger and more rapid response
    at subsequent encounter of the same antigen. Humoral immune response works mainly
    against antigens present in body ﬂuids and extracellular pathogens (mainly bacteria)
    that multiply in the body ﬂuids.


    Antibodies
    Antibodies are proteins secreted by plasma cells (differentiated B lymphocytes) in
    response to speciﬁc antigens; the antibody binds with that antigen to neutralize, inhibit
    or destroy it. Antibodies can neutralize and inactivate the speciﬁc toxins and pathogens
    in the body ﬂuids. The antibodies do not directly kill the pathogens but can interfere
    with activity of the pathogen or mark the pathogen for inactivation and destruction.
    Antibody-antigen complexes can activate complement system and phagocytosis to
    destroy the pathogen. Antibodies are also called as immunoglobulins. Immunoglobulin
    has the same Y shaped structure as B lymphocyte antigen receptors but are secreted
    than membrane bound.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book
   Role of T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes in acquired immunity
   Recognition of the antigen, binding to the antigen and sensitization:
   For an acquired immune response to occur, some T lymphocytes or B lymphocytes
   must ﬁrst recognize that a foreign antigen is present in the body. Even though there
   are vast variety of antigen receptors present on different B lymphocytes and T
   lymphocytes, only a very small fraction are speciﬁc for a particular epitope. Hence,
   antigen should be presented to the B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes until a match
   is made. Recognition of the antigen occurs through successful match between an
   epitope of the antigen and an antigen receptor on small number of B lymphocytes
   or T lymphocytes. As speciﬁc antigen receptors produced by a single T cell or B cell
   can be identical they can bind to the same epitope. Hence, both T and B cells can
   respond to any pathogen that produces molecules containing that same epitope. But B
   cells and T cells encounter antigens in different ways. T lymphocytes only recognize
   the fragments of antigenic proteins that are presented to the cells by a special cells
   called “antigen presenting cells” (macrophages, dendritic cells and B cells). However,
   B lymphocytes can recognize and bind to the antigens present in blood plasma, lymph
   and interstitial ﬂuid. The binding of an antigen to the speciﬁc antigen receptor results
   in sensitization (activation) of a speciﬁc T lymphocyte or B lymphocyte which initiates
   cell mediated and antibody mediated immune response as described below.


   Proliferation and differentiation into Effector cells: Once activated the T lymphocyte
   or B lymphocyte undergoes multiple cell divisions (proliferations) resulting a clone, a
   population of cells that are identical to the original lymphocyte. Some cells of clones
   become Effectors cells which are short lived cells that take effect immediately against
   antigen to provide primary immune responses.


   Elimination of invaders: The effector forms of T lymphocyte are “Cytotoxic T cells”
   and “Helper T cells”. Cytotoxic T cells use toxic proteins to kill the cells infected
   with the pathogen. Signals from Helper T cells activate cytotoxic T cells to kill the
   infected cells. Signals from Helper T cells can also activate B lymphocytes to initiate
   antibody production. Effector forms of B lymphocytes are “Plasma cells”. A single
   activated B lymphocyte can form thousands of identical Plasma cells. The plasma cells
   begin producing and secreting a soluble form of the B lymphocyte antigen receptor
   (antibodies) in large quantities which are released to the blood and lymph. Hence,
   circulating antibodies can neutralize and inactivate the speciﬁc toxins and pathogens
   in the body ﬂuids.


   Provide immunological memory: Following differentiation into Effector T cells
   (Cytotoxic T cells and Helper T cells), other T lymphocytes in the clones remain as
   “Memory T cells” which are long lived that can give rise to Effector T cells if the same
Resource Book                                                    G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    antigen is encountered later in the life. Similarly the remaining B lymphocytes in the
    clones are “Memory B cells” which are long lived that can give rise to Plasma cells if
    the same antigen is encountered later in the life. These Memory T cells and Memory
    B cells can cause stronger and more rapid response at subsequent encounter of the
    same antigen to the body. This immunological memory is called secondary immune
    responses.


    Active immunity
    Active immunity is a long lasting immunity mediated by the action of B lymphocytes
    and T lymphocytes in the body and the resulting B and T memory cells speciﬁc for
    a pathogen. Active immunity can be developed as a result of natural infection of a
    pathogen or artiﬁcial immunization.


Naturally acquired active immunity
  Long lasting immunity developed in the body against various infectious diseases in
  response to natural infections of pathogens is called naturally acquired active immunity.
  In response to a disease causing agent entering the body naturally for the ﬁrst time (e.g.
  Virus of Chickenpox), some T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes in the body become
  activated and eventually produce speciﬁc cytotoxic T cells and antibodies to destroy
  the pathogen. Memory B cells and T cells produced in this process are long lived that
  will provide a stronger and rapid immune responses to destroy the particular antigen
  if the same antigen (e.g. Virus of Chickenpox) is encountered later in the life. In this
  way the body can resist to subsequent infections of the same antigen.


    Artiﬁcially acquired active immunity
    Long lasting immunity induced artiﬁcially in the body against various infectious
    diseases through vaccination (immunization) of attenuated (virulence-reduced)
    pathogens is called artiﬁcially acquired active immunity. Immunization can be carried
    out with preparations of antigens (vaccines) from many sources such as killed or
    weakened pathogens, inactivated bacterial cells or genes encoding microbial proteins.
    These vaccines act as the antigens and stimulate cell mediated and antibody mediated
    immune responses leading to production of long lived memory B and T cells to destroy
    the antigen. If the pathogen from which the antigen was derived, is encountered
    naturally later in the life, long lived memory cells can provide a stronger and rapid
    immune responses to destroy the particular pathogen. In general, the antigens used
    in the vaccines are pretreated to be immunogenic but not pathogenic. For example,
    BCG vaccine which is used against tuberculosis disease in man, has been prepared
    from a strain of the attenuated live tuberculosis bacteria. Polio vaccine consists of live
    attenuated poliovirus strains. Polio vaccine produces antibodies in the blood against
    polio virus, and in the event of infection, this protects the individual by preventing the
    spread of poliovirus to the nervous system.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book


   Passive Immunity
   Passive immunity is the short term immunity developed within the body due to the
   transfer of antibodies produced by another individual. Passive immunity provides
   immediate protection, but the body does not develop memory as passive immunity
   does not involve recipients’ T cells and B cells. Passive immunity persists only until the
   transferred antibodies last (few weeks to few months). Therefore the recipient is at risk
   of being infected by the same pathogen later unless they acquire active immunity or
   vaccination. Passive immunity can be developed as a result of transferring antibodies
   to the recipient naturally or artiﬁcially.


   Naturally acquired passive immunity
   Short term antibody mediated immunity for some infectious diseases can be developed
   within the body of the fetus or nursing infant due to the natural transfer of antibodies
   produced by the mother. The immunity occurs due to the transfer of antibodies to the
   fetus blood from mother’s blood across the placenta. Antibodies also can pass from
   mother to the nursing infant through the colostrum and the milk during breast feeding.
   The baby develops the resistance against some infectious diseases for a short time.
   In this way the infant may be protected from these diseases until its own immunity
   system is fully functional. This is known as naturally acquired passive immunity.


   Artiﬁcially acquired passive immunity
   Artiﬁcially acquired passive immunity is a temporarily induced defensive protection
   achieved by the transfer of antibodies artiﬁcially to the blood of the recipient from
   another source. These readymade antibodies can be administered as blood plasma or
   serum (human or animal), or as injections of pooled human immunoglobulin from
   immunized donors or as monoclonal antibodies. Passive transfer of antibodies is used to
   prevent some infectious diseases when infectious agents are suspected to have accidently
   entered the body (e.g. readymade human serum antibodies for hepatitis A virus). It is
   also used in the treatment of several types of acute infections (e.g. readymade human
   anti-tetanus immunoglobin for acute conditions of tetanus). Passive immunization is
   also used to treat poisoning from venomous snake bite (e.g. antivenin, serum prepared
   from horses that have been immunized against snake venom). Immunity derived from
   artiﬁcially acquired passive immunization lasts for few weeks to four months.


   Allergies
   Some persons are overly reactive to substances that are tolerated by most other people.
   Antigens that induce hypersensitive reactions in some persons are called allergens.
   Exaggerated responses of the body to certain antigens (allergens) are called allergies.
   Common allergens include pollens, dust, some food (e.g. shellﬁsh), some antibiotics
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    (e.g. penicillin), venom from honey bees and wasps. Whenever an allergic reaction
    takes place the tissue injury occurs. The most allergens stimulate production of plasma
    cells which secrete antibodies speciﬁc for the antigen. When the same allergen enter the
    body later, it become attach to the antibodies speciﬁc to the allergen which induce the
    mast cells to release histamine and other inﬂammatory chemicals. Acting on a variety
    of cell types these signals bring about typical allergy symptoms such as sneezing,
    runny nose, teary eyes and smooth muscle contractions in the airways of the lungs
    that can result in breathing difﬁculties. An acute allergic conditions sometimes lead
    to death of the person due to breathing difﬁculties and low blood pressure with a few
    seconds of exposure to an allergen.


    Autoimmune diseases
    In some persons, the immune system becomes active against particular self-molecules
    of the body and begins to attack the person’s own tissues leading to an autoimmune
    disease. Possible causes for autoimmune diseases may be genetic factors, gender and
    unknown environmental triggers. Many autoimmune diseases affect females than
    males. A variety of mechanisms produce different autoimmune diseases. Some involve
    the production of autoantibodies that can affect normal functioning of certain body
    molecules. Some involve activation of Cytotoxic T cells that destroy certain body
    cells. Examples for autoimmune diseases include Type 1 Diabetes mellitus, Multiple
    sclerosis and Rheumatoid arthritis. In Type 1 Diabetes mellitus, T cells attack the
    insulin producing pancreatic beta cells. In Multiple sclerosis, T cells attack myelin
    sheaths around neurons. In Rheumatoid arthritis, painful inﬂammations of the cartilage
    and bones occur as the immune system mistakenly sends antibodies to the lining of the
    joints, where they attack the tissue surrounding the joints.


    Immunodeﬁciency diseases
    Immunodeﬁciency disease is a disorder in which responses of the immune system
    to antigens are defective or absent. An immunodeﬁciency can lead to frequent
    and recurrent infections and increased susceptibility to certain cancers. An inborn
    immunodeﬁciency results from a genetic or developmental defects in the production
    of immune system cells or speciﬁc proteins such as antibodies or proteins of the
    complement system. Acquired immunodeﬁciency can be developed later in life due
    to the exposure to chemicals or biological agents. Drugs used to ﬁght autoimmune
    diseases or prevent transplant rejections suppress the immune system leading to an
    immunodeﬁciency state. The human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), the pathogen that
    cause Acquired Immunodeﬁciency Syndrome (AIDS) escapes and attacks the immune
    system of man. The HIV causes progressive destruction of immune responses in the
    person leading to frequent infections and increased susceptibility to certain cancers
    which can cause death.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

                         Osmoregulation and excretion

   Osmoregulation is processes by which organisms control solute concentrations
   and water balance within the body. Simple unicellular organisms such as Amoeba,
   Paramecium etc. use contractile vacuoles for osmoregulation. But animals have
   developed different structures for osmoregulation. The chemical reactions that occur
   in organisms result in the formation of waste products, often toxic, which must be
   disposed in some way. The removal of the nitrogenous metabolite and other metabolic
   waste products from the body is called excretion. Defecation is not considered under
   excretion as it involves the removal of undigested food from the gut. In many animals
   excretory and osomoregulatory systems are linked structurally and functionally.


   Importance and need of osmoregulation and excretion
    For effective body functioning and survival animals have to maintain a constant
   internal environment specially the relative concentrations of water and solutes within
   favorable limits. Therefore animals need to regulate the chemical composition of body
   ﬂuids by balancing uptake and loss of water and solutes. Animal cells will swell and
   burst if water uptake is excessive. On the other hand, animal cells will shrink and die
   if water loss is high. The driving force of loss of water in animals as in plants is the
   concentration gradient of solutes across the cell membrane. Animals have evolved
   different osmoregulatory strategies depending on the environment in which they live
   for their survival.


   Animals have to get rid of toxic products produced during metabolism in order to
   safeguard the composition of their internal environment. Otherwise these excretory
   end products become toxic to the body cells. For example protein and nucleic acids are
   broken down within the body cell during metabolism and the amine group is converted
   to ammonia which is highly toxic. Ammonia also acts as a weak base. Oxidation of
   glucose during metabolism will release CO2 which is a weak acid. Accumulation of
   such weak acids and bases will alter the acid base balance in the internal environment.
   Changes in acid base balance will lead to adverse effects such as denaturation of
   proteins. Therefore removal of excretory products from the body is essential to maintain
   the internal environment within favorable limits for effective body functioning and
   survival.


   Relationship between metabolic substrates and excretory products
   Metabolic substrates in the cells are carbohydrates, fats, proteins and nucleic acids.
   The excretory products of these substrates will vary depending on several factors
   such as the chemical structure and the composition, availability of enzymes, oxygen
   availability and the habitat in which they live.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    When carbohydrates are metabolized within the body cells when oxygen is available
    ﬁnal excretory end products are CO2 and water. If they are subjected to anaerobic
    respiration in general lactic acid is produced.
    When fats are subjected to aerobic metabolism ﬁnal excretory products are CO2 and
    water. Since proteins contain amine groups in their structure, during metabolism of
    excess amino acids ammonia is produced. Since nucleic acids contain nitrogenous bases
    ammonia is produced as an excretory product during their metabolism. Depending on
    the habitat and the availability of enzymes ammonia will be further converted to other
    nitrogenous waste products such as urea and uric acid.


    Relationship between the nitrogenous excretory products and living
    environment
    Nitrogenous excretory products of animals are ammonia, uric acid and urea. These
    different forms vary signiﬁcantly in their toxicity and the energy costs of producing
    them.


    Since ammonia is highly toxic, a large volume of water is needed to excrete ammonia.
    Therefore typically the organisms that live in water such as bony ﬁshes, many aquatic
    invertebrates and aquatic amphibians specially tadpoles excrete ammonia since they
    have ready access to water. Energy cost for producing ammonia for excretion is
    comparatively low.


    Terrestrial animals do not have access to sufﬁcient water to excrete ammonia as the
    main excretory product. Instead most terrestrial animals such as mammals and adult
    amphibians mainly excrete urea as the main nitrogenous excretory product. Urea is
    less toxic. However animals must expend more energy to produce urea from ammonia.
    Some marine ﬁshes such as sharks also excrete urea (which they use for osmoregulation)
    as the main nitrogenous waste.


    Some terrestrial animals such as birds, many reptiles, land snails and insects excrete
    uric acid as the main excretory product. Uric acid is relatively non-toxic and generally
    insoluble in water Therefore it is excreted as a semisolid with trace amount of water.
    However uric acid production from ammonia requires more energy than urea production
    .
    The diversity of excretory structures of animals (Fine structures are not necessary )


    Body Surface - The cells of some animals which are in direct contact with the
    environment and eliminate excretory products by diffusion. e.g. cnidarians
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                      Resource Book

   Flame cells- These are specialized excretory cells connected to a network of tubule
   which opens to the outside of the animal. E.g. ﬂatworms.




                 Fig 5.33: Structure of the ﬂame cell
   Nephridia – They are multi cellular, tubular structures. One end of the tubule is open
   to the coelom while the other end opens to the outside. e.g. Annelids




                 Fig 5.34: Structure of the nephridia
   Malpighian tubules – These are extensive blind end tubules immersed in hemolymph
   and opens in to the digestive tract. e.g.: Insects and other terrestrial arthropods




                               Fig 5.35: Malphigian tubules
Resource Book                                                         G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Green glands / Antennal glands –Two large glands found ventrally in the head and
    anterior to the oesophagus. e.g. Crustaceans


    Sweat glands –There are coiled tubular glands situated in the dermis and connected to
    a sweat duct which open as a pore on the surface of the skin. E.g. human skin.
    Salt glands –They are paired glands found near the eyes to excrete excess salts. e.g.
    Marine birds and marine reptiles.


    Kidney – These are the major excretory and osmoregulatory organs of all vertebrates.


    Human Urinary System
    Human urinary system consists of two kidneys, two ureters, urinary bladder and
    urethra. Their main functions are given in the following table;


     Part                           Main Function
     Kidney                         Produce urine to excrete waste products while
                                    maintaining osmotic balance and acid base balance.
     Ureter                         Receives urine from kidney and send it to bladder
     Urinary bladder                Temporary storage of the urine
     Urethra                        Provide the passage through which urine stored in the
                                    bladder leaves the body




                  Fig 5.36: The parts of the human urinary system
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

   Location of kidneys
   Two kidneys are located on the posterior abdominal wall one on either side of the
   vertebral column, behind the peritoneum and below the diaphragm. Right kidney is
   slightly lower than the left.


   Blood supply
   The kidneys receive blood from aorta via the renal arteries and renal veins return blood
   to the inferior vena cava.


   Gross structure of the kidney
   Kidney is a bean shaped organ which is held in position by a mass of fat and both are
   surrounded by a ﬁbrous connective tissue. In the longitudinal section of the kidney
   three areas of tissues can be seen to the naked eye. They are outer ﬁbrous capsule,
   renal cortex and inner renal medulla. Cortex and medulla are supplied with blood
   vessels and tightly packed with excretory tubules. Renal Cortex is granulated due to
   the presence of glomeruli. Medulla is composed of renal pyramids, which have striated
   appearance. Apices of pyramids project in to the renal pelvis through renal papillae.
   Renal pelvis leads into the ureter. Renal artery and renal vein pass through the pelvis.




                 Fig 5.37: Longitudinal section of human Kidney


   Structure of Nephron
   Nephron is the structural and functional unit of the kidney. There are over millions of
   nephrons in each kidney. There are two types of nephrons; they are cortical nephrons
   (reach short distance to the medulla) and juxta medullary nephrons (extend deep into
   the medulla).
   Majority of the nephrons are cortical nephrons.
Resource Book                                                       G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology


    A nephron consists of a single long tubule and a ball of capillaries called the glomerulus.
    The tubule is closed at one end forming Bowman’s capsule which surrounds the
    glomerulus. The other end of the tubule joins with the collecting duct.
    Tubule consists of;
       • Bowman’s capsule
       • Proximal convoluted tubule
       • Loop of Henle
       • Distal convoluted tubule




                 Fig 5.38: A nephron and associated blood vessels


    Bowman’s capsule (Glomerular capsule)
    This is expanded and closed end of the tubular structure of the nephron. It is a cup
    shaped and double walled structure. Inner layer of Bowman’s capsule consists of a
    single layer of ﬂattened epithelial cells specialized for ﬁltration. Outer layer of the
    Bowman’s capsule composed of simple squamous epithelium. Space between the
    inner and outer layers is known as capsular space which is responsible for receiving of
    glomerular ﬁltrate. The glomerular ﬁltrate pass through three major tubular regions of
    the nephron: proximal convoluted tubule, loop of Henle and distal convoluted tubule.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book

   Glomerulus
   The glomerulus is a ball of capillaries which is surrounded by Bowman’s capsule. The
   nephron is supplied with blood from the afferent arteriole. The blood vessel leaving
   away from the glomerulus is the efferent arteriole. The efferent arteriole has a smaller
   diameter than the afferent arteriole. This modiﬁcation is important for increasing blood
   pressure in the glomerulus for ultraﬁltration.
   The efferent arteriole form two capillary networks, one form the peritubular capillaries
   which surrounds the proximal and distal convoluted tubules and the other network
   form the vasa recta which extend towards the medulla surrounding the loop of Henle.




                 Fig 5.39 The Glomerulus and the Bowman’s capsule


   Proximal convoluted tubule
   It is comparatively longer and wider than the distal convoluted tubule. This is lined by
   simple epithelium which has been specialized for selective reabsorption of substances(
   nutrients, ions and water) from the glomerular ﬁltrate


   Loop of Henle
   It is a ‘U’ shaped part of the nephron with descending limb and ascending limb which
   are lined by simple epithelium.
   Lining of the descending limb of loop of Henle is specialized for water reabsorption as
   it allows free movement of water. But lining of the ascending limb of loop of Henle is
   impermeable to water.
Resource Book                                                   G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    Distal convoluted tubule
    It is lined by simple epitheliam which has been specialized for selective reabsorption
    of speciﬁc ions and water. It leads into collecting duct.


Main steps in urine formation
 There are 3 processes involved in urine formation. They are;
       • ultraﬁltration
       • selective reabsorption
       • secretion


    Ultra ﬁltration
       • Filtration of the blood under high pressure into the cavity of the Bowmans’
         capsule is called ultraﬁltration.
       • Filtration occurs through the capillary walls of glomerulus and inner wall of
         Bowman’s capsule.
       • Blood capillaries of glomerulus are porous and cells lining the Bowmans’
         capsule are specialized for ﬁltration of small size molecules and ions. These
         specializations allow passage of water and small solutes through the blood
         capillary walls into the Bowman’s capsule. But due to their large size, blood
         cells, platelets and large molecules such as plasma proteins do not pass into the
         Bowmans’ capsule.
       • The ﬁltrate in the Bowmans’ capsule contains salts, amino acids, glucose,
         vitamins, nitrogenous wastes and other small molecules. The composition of the
         glomerular ﬁltrate is similar in composition to plasma with exceptions of blood
         cells, platelets and plasma proteins.


    Selective reabsorption
       • The process through which useful molecules, ions and water from the glomerular
         ﬁltrate are recovered and returned to the interstitial ﬂuid and then into capillary
         network of the tubules is called selective reabsorption.
       • Most of the reabsorption from the glomerular ﬁltrate back into the blood takes
         place in the convoluted tubule. Ions, water and valuable nutrients are reabsorbed
         either active or passive transport from initial ﬁltrate.
    Secretion
       • The process by which foreign materials and substances not required to the body
         including waste are cleared from the peritubular capillaries and interstitial ﬂuid
         into the ﬁltrate is called secretion
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                          Resource Book

      • Secretion is required because such substances may not be entirely ﬁltered due to
        the short time they remain in the glomerulus.
      • Substances that are secreted in to the ﬁltrate include H+, NH3, creatinine, drugs
        (e.g. penicillin, aspirin) and excess K+. Tubular secretion of H+ and NH3 are
        important to maintain the normal pH in the blood by formation of NH4+ in the
        urine. NH3 can combine with H+ to form NH4+
      • Secretion occurs in the proximal and distal convoluted tubules. Secretion may be
        either active or passive depending on the location and / or the substance.


   Process of urine formation
   Glomerular ﬁltrate in the Bowmans’ capsule which contains all the substances in the
   blood except blood cells, platelets and large molecules pass to the proximal convoluted
   tubule. At this region selective reabsorption of ions, water and valuable nutrients from
   the initial ﬁltrate occurs. Nutrients especially glucose and amino acids are actively
   transported to the interstitial ﬂuid. Cells lining the tubule actively transport Na+ into
   the interstitial ﬂuid and this transfer a positive charge out of the tubule drives the
   passive transport of Cl-. Proximal tubule also reabsorbs K+ and most of the HCO3- by
   passive transport. Reabsorption of HCO3- in the ﬁltrate contributes to the pH balance
   in body ﬂuids. As solutes move from the ﬁltrate to interstitial ﬂuid water is reabsorbed
   passively by osmosis. A major portion of water reabsorption from the ﬁltrate occurs
   at this site. As the ﬁltrate pass through the proximal convoluted tubule, secretion of
   speciﬁc substances into the ﬁltrate takes place. Cells lining the tubule secrete H+ (by
   active transport) and ammonia (by passive transport) into the lumen of the tubule.
   Secreted ammonia act as a buffer to trap H+ forming NH4+. In addition some materials
   such as drugs and toxins that have been metabolized in the liver are actively secreted
   into the lumen of the proximal convoluted tubule. As a result of water reabsorption and
   secretion of different substances, the ﬁltrate becomes more concentrated as it passes
   through the proximal convoluted tubule.


   As the ﬁltrate moves into the descending limb of loop of Henle passive reabsorption of
   water through osmosis continues and ﬁltrate becomes more concentrated. The ﬁltrate
   reaches the ascending limb of the loop of Henle via the tip of the loop. Ascending limb
   is impermeable to water so that no water absorption takes place but a considerable
   amount of NaCl reabsorption occurs at this site. Most of the Na+ is transported into the
   interstitial ﬂuid by active transport. As a result of losing NaCl but not water the ﬁltrate
   become more diluted as it moves towards the distal convoluted tubule.
   The distal convoluted tubule plays an important role in regulating K+ and NaCl
   concentration of body ﬂuids. The amount of K+ secreted (by active transport) into the
   ﬁltrate and the amount of NaCl (by active transport) reabsorbed from the ﬁltrate can
   be varied at this site according to the needs of the body. Distal tubule also contributes
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

    to pH regulation by controlled secretion of H+ and reabsorption of HCO3-. At the distal
    convoluted tubule passive water reabsorption can be increased under the inﬂuence of
    Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) to form concentrated urine. Aldesterone secreted by the
    adrenal gland stimulates increase reabsorption of Na+ and water and excretion of K+ .
    This ﬁltrate of the distal convoluted tubule ﬁnally leads to the collecting duct.
    As the ﬁltrate pass along the collecting duct ﬁltrate become concentrated and urine is
    formed. At this site water reabsorption can also be increased under the inﬂuence of
    ADH and urine become more concentrated. Aldesterone hormone stimulates active
    reabsorption of Na+ and passive reabsorption of water at the collecting duct. Because
    of the high urea concentration in the ﬁltrate at this region some urea diffuses into the
    interstitial ﬂuid. Final processing of the ﬁltrate at the collecting duct forms the urine.


    When producing dilute urine the kidney actively reabsorb salts without allowing water
    to be reabsorbed by osmosis.




                 Fig 5.40 Reabsorption and secretion of different molecules and ions in the nephron
                 and formation of urine in the collecting duct
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                               Resource Book

   Role of hormones on the functions of the kidney




                 Fig5.41 Regulation of blood osmotic pressure and ﬂuid retention in the kidney by
                 ADH
Resource Book                                                        G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology




                Fig5.42: Regulation of blood osmotic pressure and ﬂuid retention in the kidney by
                ADH
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                         Resource Book
   Role of kidney in homeostasis
      • Maintaining electrolyte and water balance in the body ﬂuids (osmoregulation).
      • Excretion of toxic waste products from the body.
      • Regulating blood pH through acid base balance.
      • Controlling blood volume and blood pressure.
      • Secretion of erythropoeitein hormone that stimulates red blood cell production.
      • Production and Secretion of renin an enzyme important in control of blood
        pressure.


   Disorders related to human urinary system
   Bladder and kidney stones
   These are formed due to precipitation of urinary constituents (usually oxalates and
   phosphates) normally in urine. They are also called renal calculi.
   Causes include
      • Dehydration due to not drinking sufﬁcient amount of ﬂuids.
      • Alkaline nature of urine.
      • Infections that can alter pH of urine
      • Metabolic condition.
      • Family history.
   Measures for prevention
      • Drinking plenty of water
   Kidney failure
   This is due to the inability of the kidneys to function properly. Therefore waste products
   and excess ﬂuid will be accumulated in the blood.


   Reasons for kidney failure
   • Diabetes
   • High blood pressure
   • Having family history
   • Getting older


   Chronic kidney disease (CKD)
   It is a condition of gradual loss of kidney function over time. There are many reasons
   for Kidney failure:
      • Diabetes
      • High blood pressure
Resource Book                                                 G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology

       • Having family history
       • Getting older
    Prevent CKD
       Follow a low salt, low fat diet
       Doing proper exercise
       Having regular check ups
       Prevent smoking


    Dialysis
    Dialysis is done for the patients with kidney failure. It is a process of removing
    excretory products, excess solutes and toxins from the blood by an artiﬁcial method.


Chronic kidney disease of unknown/uncertain etiology (CKDu) in Sri Lanka
    • It is a condition of gradual loss of kidney function over time. The root cause of
       CKDu has not been deﬁnitively established yet – hence it is referred to as ‘Chronic
       kidney disease of unknown/uncertain etiology’. However it is a different form
       of chronic kidney disease (CKD), which is associated with conventional risk
       factors such as diabetes and high blood pressure, genetic disorders and urinary
       tract problems
       •
       • The onset of the disease appears to be asymptomatic, and by the time the patient
         seeks treatment the kidneys have reached a stage of irreversible damage -end
         stage renal disease (ESRD).
       • In Sri Lanka, initially CKDu was prevalent among rural communities in North
         Central province (Medawachchiya, Kabithigollawa, Padaviya, Medirigiriya,
         regions), Uva (Girandurukotte), Eastern Provinces (Dehiattakandiya). CKDu is
         also reported in North Western, Southern and Central provinces, and parts of the
         Northern Province of the island.

    Hypothesized reasons for CKDu
    Cause of CKDu seems to be multifactorial.
       • Exposure to Heavy metal/ metaloid such as Arsenic (As) and Cadmium (Cd)
         through food and water.
       • Usage of low quality utensils for preparation of foods.
       • High Flouride (F) levels in water.
       • Exposure to pesticides.
       • Genetic factors.
       • Malnutrition and dehydration.
G.C.E. (Advanced Level) Biology                                        Resource Book



   Notes:


   This is to acknowledge that some of the diagrams used in this book have been taken
   from various electronic sources using internet . This book is not published to make
   proﬁt and sold only to cover cost.
   The resource book is prepared according to the subject content and learning
   outcomes of the G.C.E. (A.L) Biology new syllabus which is implemented from
   2017.
   The content of this Resource book declares the limitation of the G.C.E. (A.L) Biology
   new syllabus which is implemented from 2017.



   References


   1. Biology ,A Global Approach, 10th edition (by Campbell Reece, Urry, Cain,
      Wasserman.      Minorsky, Jackson)
   2. Ross and Wilson Anatomy and physiology in Health and Illness (12th edition by
      Anne Waugh and Allison Grant)
